CHAPTER1
4.6 picturesque tricks] pictorial tricks
4.7 presented itself to the lawn, with its patches of ivy] presented to the lawn
its patches of ivy
5.8 But at present, obviously,] At present, obviously, nevertheless,
5.10 with evenly distributed features] with features evenly distributed
5.12 the range of expression was not large;] the range of representation was
not large,
5.14 but it seemed to tell] yet it seemed to tell
5.23 the master contemplated the still more magisterial physiognomy of the
house] the master took in the still more magisterial physiognomy of the house
6.2 a person of quite another pattern] a person of quite a different pattern
6.13 that they were father and son] they were father and son
6.23 his son inquired] the son enquired
7.1 “It strikes me that we are rather particular,” said his companion.] “It
strikes me we’re rather particular,” his companion remarked.
7.8 said Lord Warburton,] Lord Warburton resumed
8.9 to believe anything] to believe in anything
9.5 because you are so ridiculously wealthy] because you have—haven’t
you?—such unlimited means
9.6 said the other young man, indicating his father] the other young man
mercifully pleaded
9.24 “The increasing seriousness of things—that is, the great opportunity of
jokes.”] “The increasing seriousness of things, then—that’s the great opportu-
nity of jokes.”
10.21 such ethereal ones] such highly ethereal ones
10.29 the old man declared,] the old man returned
10.36 to come with her] to come out with her
12.4 “It’s her independence,” her son explained, more favourably. “Whatever
that of those young ladies may be, her own is a match for it.] “It’s her share in
the family trait, the independence she speaks of.” Her son’s appreciation of the
matter was more favourable. “Whatever the high spirit of those young ladies
may be, her own is a match for it.
12.12 Mr. Touchett declared] Mr. Touchett replied
12.18 you would be a good husband] you’d be a remarkable husband
12.22 As for my being a good husband, I am not sure of that either; one can
but try!”] As for my being a good husband,” Mr. Touchett’s visitor pursued,
“I’m not sure of that either. One can but try!”
12.23 don’t try on my niece,” said the old man] don’t try on my niece,” smiled
the old man
CHAPTER2
13.5 His face was turned towards the house, but his eyes were bent, musingly,
upon the lawn] His face was turned toward the house, but his eyes were bent
musingly on the lawn
13.6 the doorway of the dwelling] the ample doorway
13.11 the little terrier] the small beast
13.15 his joyous demonstration] his quick chatter
14.5 a little darling] a perfect little darling
14.7 he said] he then replied
14.10 she murmured] she brought out
14.13 Have you come with my mother?] Have you arrived with my
mother?
14.21 “You are very welcome here,” he went on.] “You’re very welcome here.
14.23 an eye that denoted quick perception] an eye that denoted clear
perception
14.25 “I have never seen anything so lovely as this place,” she said.] “I’ve
never seen anything so lovely as this place.
14.31 The young girl gave a laugh.] The girl gave a laugh.
14.36 the little terrier] the small dog
15.2 she lingered in the doorway] she lingered so near the threshold
15.3 her interlocutor wondered whether] her interlocutor wondered if
15.11 he was rather—rather strong] he was rather—rather intensely active
15.14 “Well, he has got a lovely place to sit. Come along, little dogs.”] “Well,
he has a lovely place to sit. Come along, little hound.”
15.18 her attention having reverted to the terrier again] her attention having
again reverted to the terrier
15.20 “Yes,” said the young lady, humorously] “Yes,” said the young lady
with amusement
16.6 the old man murmured] the old man commented
16.7 he went on, addressing his wife’s niece] he observed to his wife’s niece
16.8 the moment I arrived] the moment I got there
16.15 she had also narrowly scrutinised her companions] she had made room
in it for her companions
16.20 her eye brilliant, her flexible figure turned itself lightly] her eye lighted,
her flexible figure turned itself easily
16.23 “I have never seen anything so beautiful as this,” she declared.] “I’ve
never seen anything so beautiful as this.”
16.28 young girls] young persons
16.31 she exclaimed quickly, with a little laugh] she returned with a quick
laugh
16.34 watching his face a little] watching his face
17.5 He bent towards her a little] He slightly inclined himself,
17.16 “Are you very fond of dogs?” he inquired, by way of beginning; and it
was an awkward beginning for a clever man.] “Are you very fond of dogs?” he 
enquired by way of beginning. He seemed to recognise that it was an awkward
beginning for a clever man.
17.31 in New York, and Albany, and other places] in New York and Albany
and other American places
17.33 Miss Archer hesitated a moment.] Miss Archer just hesitated.
18.5 I should come to Europe] I should come with her to Europe
18.12 she rested her startled eyes upon him] she rested her wider eyes on him
18.13 “Oh, no; she has not adopted me,” she said. “I am not a candidate for
adoption.”] “Oh no; she has not adopted me. I’m not a candidate for adoption.”
18.22 The girl hesitated a moment, smiling.] The girl hesitated again, smiling.
18.24 and then she went over to her uncle] after which she went over to her
uncle
CHAPTER3
19.5 although it was by no means without benevolence,] although by no
means without liberal motions
19.6 an impression of softness] an impression of suavity
19.8 it was simply very sharply distinguished] it was just unmistakeably
distinguished
19.10 a wounding effect] a knife-like effect
19.11 This purity of outline was visible in her deportment] That hard fineness
came out in her deportment
19.16 until she had achieved a toilet] until she had repaired the disorder of
dress with a completeness
19.18 without coquetry] without graces
19.24 It had become apparent, at an early stage of their relations,] It had
become clear, at an early stage of their community,
19.25 and this fact had prompted her] and this appearance had
prompted her
19.29 leaving her husband in England to take care of his bank] leaving her
husband to take care of the English branch of his bank
19.30 so extremely definite] so felicitously definite
20.2 discomfort should have a greater vagueness] such unnatural things
should have a greater vagueness
20.8 She was not fond of England,] She was not fond of the English style
of life,
20.9 minor points of British civilisation,] minor points of that ancient
order,
20.16 this last one had been longer] this last had been longer
20.20 To say that she had a book] To say she was so occupied
20.23 a want of lightness in her situation, which the arrival of an unexpected
visitor did much to dispel] a want of fresh taste in her situation which the
arrival of an unexpected visitor did much to correct
20.26 the windows of the parlour] the windows of one of the lower
apartments
21.9 more plentiful, more sociable] more plentiful, practically more festal
21.14 standing invitations to stay with her] standing invitations to arrive and
remain
21.18 she thought her grandmother’s dwelling picturesque] she thought her
grandmother’s home romantic
21.21 containing certain capital peach-trees] containing peach-trees of barely
credible familiarity
21.23 On the other side, opposite, across the street] On the other side, across
the street
21.29 kept in an amateurish manner by a demonstrative lady] kept or rather
let go, by a demonstrative lady
21.30 her hair was puffed out very much] her hair was fastened with strange
bedroomy combs
21.34 she had expressed great disgust with the place,] she had protested
against its laws
22.15 relations almost human, or dramatic] relations almost human, certainly
dramatic
22.19 that was fastened by bolts] that it was secured by bolts
22.30 the most joyless chamber it contained] the most depressed of its scenes
22.33 the vulgar street lay beyond it] the vulgar street lay beyond
22.34 A crude, cold rain was falling heavily; the spring-time presented itself
as a questionable improvement.] A crude, cold rain fell heavily; the spring-time
was indeed an appeal—and it seemed a cynical, insincere appeal—to patience.
22.35 Isabel, however, gave as little attention as possible to the incongruities
of the season] Isabel, however, gave as little heed as possible to cosmic
treacheries
23.7 some one was walking about the library] some one was moving in the
library
23.9 a person from whom she had reason to expect a visit;] a person from
whom she was looking for a visit,
23.16 she had a sharp, but not an unpleasant, face] she had a face with a good
deal of rather violent point
23.17 “Oh,” she said, “is that where you usually sit?” And she looked about]
“Oh,” she began, “is that where you usually sit?” She looked about
23.20 and the visitor continued] while the visitor continued
23.28 And then, while the girl stood there, hesitating and wondering] And
then, since the girl stood there hesitating and wondering
23.35 I am not crazy.] I’m not at all crazy: I haven’t a delusion!
24.9 she addressed not a word] she had addressed not a word
24.16 any account of them that she should elicit by letter] any account of
them she should elicit by letter
24.25 occupying the mansion] occupying the old place
24.27 “How much money do you expect to get for it?” Mrs. Touchett asked of
the girl] “How much money do you expect for it?” Mrs. Touchett asked of her
companion
24.34 In point of fact, what have you inherited?] What have you in point of
fact inherited?
25.2 I suspect, it will bring a high price] I dare say, it will bring a high
price
25.10 “Yes; but I don’t dislike it for that,” said the girl, rather strangely.] “Yes;
but I don’t dislike it for that,” the girl rather strangely returned.
25.26 I will take you there,” Mrs. Touchett rejoined.] I’ll take you there,”
Mrs. Touchett declared.
25.28 The girl’s emotion deepened; she flushed a little, and smiled at her aunt
in silence.] Our young woman’s emotion deepened; she flushed a little and
smiled at her aunt in silence.
25.30 No, you don’t look like a young lady of that sort.] No, you don’t look
like a person of that sort.
25.36 found her a strange and interesting person] found her a strange and
interesting figure: a figure essentially—almost the first she had ever met
26.2 she had thought of them as disagreeable] she had thought of them as
offensive or alarming
26.6 To her imagination the term had always suggested something grotesque
and inharmonious. But her aunt infused a new vividness into the idea, and
gave her so many fresh impressions that it seemed to her she had over-
estimated the charms of conformity. She had never met any one so entertain-
ing] The term had always suggested to her something grotesque and even
sinister. But her aunt made it a matter of high but easy irony, or comedy, and
led her to ask herself if the common tone, which was all she had known, had
ever been as interesting. No one certainly had on any occasion so held her
26.10 striking familiarity of European courts] striking familiarity of the
courts of Europe
26.11 she was fond of social grandeur, and she enjoyed the consciousness] she
recognised no social superiors, and, judging the great ones of the earth in a way
that spoke of this, enjoyed the consciousness
26.16 her aunt’s answers, whatever they were, struck her as deeply interest-
ing] her aunt’s answers, whatever turn they took, struck her as food for deep
reflexion
26.20 “Your sister must be a great gossip,” she said. “Is she accustomed to
staying out for hours?”] “Your sister must be a great gossip. Is she accustomed
to staying out so many hours?”
26.21 Isabel answered] Isabel replied
26.24 disposed to be gracious to her niece] disposed to be gracious
CHAPTER4
27.4 the “intellectual” one] the “intellectual” superior
27.5 Mrs. Keyes, the second sister] Mrs. Keyes, the second of the group
27.7 it will be enough to say] it will suffice
27.12 the match was not brilliant, any more than Edith’s had been] the match
was not brilliant, any more than Edith’s
27.17 the mistress of a house which presented a narrowness of new brown
stone to Fifty third Street, she had quite justified her claim to matrimony] the
mistress of a wedge of brown stone violently driven into Fifty-third Street,
seemed to exult in her condition as in a bold escape
27.18 She was short and plump, and, as people said, had improved since her
marriage;] She was short and solid, and her claim to figure was questioned, but
she was conceded presence, though not majesty; she had moreover, as people
said, improved since her marriage,
27.23 “I have never felt like Isabel’s sister, and I am sure I never shall,” she
had said to an intimate friend; a declaration which made it all the more
creditable that she had been prolific in sisterly offices.] “I’ve never kept up
with Isabel—it would have taken all my time,” she had often remarked; in spite
of which, however, she held her rather wistfully in sight; watching her as a
motherly spaniel might watch a free greyhound.
27.25 she frequently remarked to her husband] she frequently noted to her
husband
28.4 the girl’s account of Mrs. Touchett’s visit,] the girl’s account of
Mrs. Touchett’s appearance
28.4 to comply with her commands] to comply with their aunt’s commands
28.5 Of what Isabel said to her] Of what Isabel then said
28.7 her sister’s words must have prompted a remark that she made to her
husband in the conjugal chamber as the two were getting ready to go to the
hotel] her sister’s words had doubtless prompted a word spoken to her
husband as the two were making ready for their visit
28.11 Edmund Ludlow asked; “make her a big present?”] Edmund Ludlow
asked. “Make her a big present?”
28.13 just the sort of person to appreciate Isabel] just the sort of person to
appreciate her
28.20 “And you want the old lady to take her, is that it?” her husband asked.]
“And you want the old lady to take her, is that it?”
28.21 she is dying to have Isabel go!] she’s dying to have Isabel go.
28.23 I am sure that all we have got to do,” said Mrs. Ludlow, “is to give her a
chance!”] I’m sure all we’ve got to do,” said Mrs. Ludlow, “is to give her a
chance.”
28.26 “O Jupiter!”] “Oh Moses!”
28.30 “Do you know I love you?”] “Do you know I love you?”
28.33 whose voice and smile, however, were sweeter than the words she
uttered] whose voice and smile, however, were less haughty than her words
29.7 she at any rate felt busy; busy, I mean, with her thoughts] she at any rate
felt different, felt as if something had happened to her
29.8 she sat a while under the lamp, with empty hands, heedless of her usual
avocations] she sat a while under the lamp, her hands empty, her usual
avocations unheeded
29.10 She was restless, and even excited] She was restless and even agitated
29.13 She felt that something had happened to her of which the importance
was out of proportion to its appearance] The importance of what had
happened was out of proportion to its appearance
29.15 a situation which gave a value to any change] a situation that gave a
value to any change
29.20 not with a desire to take a nap] not with a desire for dozing
forgetfulness
29.21 On the contrary, it was because she felt too wide-awake,] It was on the
contrary because she felt too wide-eyed
29.23 if the door were not opened to it, it jumped out of the window] when
the door was not open it jumped out of the window
29.32 a very fortunate girl] a very fortunate person
29.35 anything particularly disagreeable] anything particularly unpleasant
29.36 the disagreeable had been even too absent] the unpleasant had been
even too absent
30.5 It was a great good fortune to have been his daughter; Isabel was even
proud of her parentage.] It was a great felicity to have been his daughter; Isabel
rose even to pride in her parentage.
30.7 she had gathered a vague impression that he turned his brighter side to
his children, and that he had not eluded discomfort] she had seemed to see him
as turning his braver side to his children and as not having managed to ignore
the ugly
30.9 to have to think that he was too generous] to have to suppose him too
generous
30.11 Many persons thought that he carried this indifference too far;] Many
persons had held that he carried this indifference too far,
30.14 while they admitted that the late Mr. Archer had a remarkably hand-
some head] while they had recognised in the late Mr. Archer a remarkably
handsome head
30.16 they declared that he had made a very poor use of his life] they had
declared that he was making a very poor use of his life
30.22 been sent to strange schools kept by foreigners] been sent to superficial
schools, kept by the French
30.25 her opportunities had been abundant] her opportunities had been large
30.27 a French bonne, who eloped with a Russian nobleman,] a French bonne
who had eloped with a Russian nobleman
30.29 a picturesque episode] a romantic episode
30.35 a few months’ view of foreign lands;] a few months’ view of the subject
proposed:
31.2 for among his three daughters she was quite his favourite, and in his last
days] for she was the member of his trio who most “made up” to him for the
disagreeables he didn’t mention. In his last days
31.4 was sensibly modified] had been sensibly modified
31.11 much more popular] much more fetching
31.14 the moderate character of her own triumphs] the limits of her own
power to frisk and jump and shriek—above all with rightness of effect
31.17 thinking all the others a parcel of fools] thinking all the others æsthetic
vulgarians
31.28 to abstain from quotation] to abstain from showy reference
31.33 the movements of her own heart] the movements of her own soul
32.1 a class of efforts to which she had often gone so far as to forgive much
bad painting] a class of efforts as to which she had often committed the
conscious solecism of forgiving them much bad painting
32.5 the circumspection of the local youth] the circumspection of suspicious
swains
32.7 the proportion of those whose hearts] the number of those whose
hearts
32.9 to make it a sensible pleasure, was sufficient to redeem her maidenly
career from failure] to remind them they had heads as well, had kept her
unacquainted with the supreme disciplines of her sex and age
32.10 everything that a girl could have: kindness, admiration, flattery, bou-
quets] everything a girl could have: kindness, admiration, bonbons, bouquets
32.13 the latest publications, plenty of new dresses, the London Spectator, and
a glimpse of contemporary æsthetics] plenty of new dresses, the London
Spectator, the latest publications, the music of Gounod, the poetry of
Browning, the prose of George Eliot
32.24 He sometimes wrote to Isabel, and he had lately written to her from
New York.] He sometimes wrote to her and had within a week or two written
from New York.
32.26 Nevertheless, now that she learned he was there,] Now that she learned
he was there, nevertheless,
32.29 He $...$ was, indeed, quite a magnificent young man; he filled her with
a certain feeling of respect which she had never entertained for any one else.]
He $...$ was indeed quite a splendid young man; he inspired her with a
sentiment of high, of rare respect. She had never felt equally moved to it by
any other person.
32.34 she was still at the capital] she was still at the State capital
32.35 a certain feeling of embarrassment] a new sense of complications
33.2 He was not especially good-looking,] He was not romantically, he was
much rather obscurely, handsome;
33.3 which it rewarded or not,] which it rewarded
33.4 in a blue eye of remarkable fixedness] in blue eyes of remarkable
fixedness, the eyes of a complexion other than his own,
33.6 but, nevertheless, an hour later] in spite of which, in half an hour
33.9 He was not, however, a man to be discouraged by a defeat.] He was not,
it may be added, a man weakly to accept defeat.
CHAPTER5
34.11 in her thoughts his turn always came after the care of her house and her
conservatory (she was extremely fond of flowers)] in her thoughts and her
thoroughly arranged and servanted life his turn always came after the; other
nearest subjects of her solicitude, the various punctualities of performance of
the; workers of her will
34.15 she remarked] remarked
34.17 she also might have broken down] she also might have given way
34.18 the idea of his mother breaking down,] the idea of his mother’s
giving way,
34.19 his own enfeebled condition] his own infirmity
34.22 who was a native of Rutland] a native of Rutland
34.24 in a banking-house, in which some ten years later he acquired a
preponderant interest] in a banking-house where some ten years later he
gained preponderant control
34.26 he took a simple, cheerful, and eminently practical view] he took a
simple, sane and accommodating view
34.28 he had no intention of turning Englishman, nor had he any desire to
convert his only son to the same sturdy faith] he had no intention of disamer-
icanising, nor had he a desire to teach his only son any such subtle art
34.31 It had been for himself so very soluble a problem to live in England, and
yet not be of it, that it seemed to him equally simple that after his death his
lawful heir should carry on the bank in a pure American spirit.] It had been for
himself so very soluble a problem to live in England assimilated yet uncon-
verted that it seemed to him equally simple his lawful heir should after his
death carry on the grey old bank in the white American light.
34.31 He took pains to cultivate this spirit] He was at pains to intensify this light
35.2 an American college] an American university
35.3 as even redundantly national] as even redundantly native
35.8 naturally inclined to jocosity] naturally inclined to adventure
35.16 to put the ocean (which he detested) permanently between himself
and the old man] to put a watery waste permanently between himself and
the old man
35.18 Ralph was not only fond of his father, but he admired him] Ralph was
not only fond of his father, he admired him
35.20 though he himself had no great fancy for the banking business,] though
he himself had no aptitude for the banking mystery
35.22 it was the old man’s effective simplicity] it was the fine ivory surface,
polished as by the English air, that the old man had opposed to possibilities of
penetration
35.24 he had put into his son’s hands] he had placed in his son’s hands
35.30 Mr. Touchett had given evidence of this talent only up to a certain
point. He had made himself thoroughly comfortable in England, but he had
never attempted to pitch his thoughts in the English key.] Mr. Touchett had
made of the very limits of his pliancy half the ground of his general success.
35.31 He had retained many characteristics of Rutland, Vermont] He had
retained in their freshness most of his marks of primary pressure
35.36 At the end of his life, especially, he was a gentle, refined, fastidious old
man, who combined consummate shrewdness with a sort of fraternising good
humour, and whose feeling about his own position in the world was quite of
the democratic sort.] At the end of his life he had become, on his own ground,
as mellow as he was rich; he combined consummate shrewdness with the
disposition superficially to fraternize, and his “social position,” on which he
had never wasted a care, had the firm perfection of an unthumbed fruit.
36.6 There were certain differences he never perceived, certain habits he
never formed, certain mysteries he never understood.] There were certain
differences he had never perceived, certain habits he had never formed, certain
obscurities he had never sounded.
36.6 on the day that he had understood them] on the day he had sounded them
36.8 Ralph $...$ spent a couple of years in travelling; after which he found
himself mounted on a high stool] Ralph $...$ had spent a couple of years in
travelling; after which he had found himself perched on a high stool
36.14 he became conscious that he was seriously out of health] he had
become aware of his being seriously out of health
36.16 threw them into extreme embarrassment] threw them into dire
confusion
36.17 embrace the sorry occupation known as taking care of one’s self] apply,
to the letter, the sorry injunction to take care of himself
36.19 At first he was greatly disgusted; it appeared to him that it was not
himself in the least that he was taking care of] At first he slighted the task; it
appeared to him it was not himself in the least he was taking care of
36.22 and even undemonstrative respect] even an undemonstrative respect
36.26 it usually seemed to him to be his reputation for common sense—
devoted to his unattractive protégé an amount of attention of which note was
duly taken,] it usually struck him as his reputation for ordinary wit—devoted
to his graceless charge an amount of attention of which note was duly taken
36.28 he was assured that he might] he was assured he might
36.29 betake himself to one of those climates] betake himself to those
climates
36.34 He had grown extremely fond of London, and cursed this immitigable
necessity; but at the same time that he cursed, he conformed, and gradually,
when he found that his sensitive organ was really grateful for such grim
favours, he conferred them with a better grace.] As he had grown extremely
fond of London, he cursed the flatness of exile: but at the same time that he
cursed he conformed, and gradually, when he found his sensitive organ grate-
ful even for grim favours, he conferred them with a lighter hand.
36.36 when it snowed] when it had snowed overnight
37.2 A certain fund of indolence that he possessed came to his aid and helped
to reconcile him to doing nothing; for at the best he was too ill for anything but
a passive life.] A secret hoard of indifference—like a thick cake a fond old nurse
might have slipped into his first school outfit—came to his aid and helped to
reconcile him to sacrifice; since at the best he was too ill for aught but that
arduous game.
37.4 he had given up nothing] he had at least not renounced the field of
valour
37.6 to remind him that the finest pleasures of life are to be found in the
world of action] and remind him that the finest of pleasures is the rush of
action
37.12 this history opens; he had on this occasion] this history opens: he had
on that occasion
37.14 He reached it more dead than alive,] He arrived more dead than
alive
37.18 but that it was also open to him] yet that it was also open to him
37.22 it seemed to him that the delights of observation had never been
suspected] it seemed to him the joys of contemplation had never been
sounded
37.25 to struggle with a good deal of native indifference] to struggle in the
same breast with bursts of inspiring self-criticism
37.26 His friends at present found him much more cheerful] His friends at
present judged him more cheerful
37.28 The truth was that he had simply accepted the situation.] His serenity
was but the array of wild flowers niched in his ruin.
37.32 It was very probable this sweet-tasting property of observation to
which I allude (for he found himself in these last years much more
inclined to notice the pleasant things of the world than the others) that
was mainly concerned in Ralph’s quickly-stirred interest in the arrival of a
young lady] It was very probably this sweet-tasting property of the
observed thing in itself that was mainly concerned in Ralph’s quickly-
stirred interest in the advent of a young lady
37.33 If he were observantly disposed] If he was consideringly disposed
38.8 It may be added, somewhat crudely, that the liberty of falling in love had
a place in Ralph Touchett’s programme. This was of course a liberty to be very
temperately used; for though the safest form of any sentiment is that which is
conditioned upon silence, it is not always the most comfortable, and Ralph had
forbidden himself the art of demonstration. But conscious observation of a
lovely woman had struck him as the finest entertainment that the world now
had to offer him, and if the interest should become poignant, he flattered
himself that he could carry it off quietly, as he had carried other discomforts.
He speedily acquired a conviction, however, that he was not destined to fall in
love with his cousin.] It may be added, in summary fashion, that the imagina-
tion of loving—as distinguished from that of being loved—had still a place in
his reduced sketch. He had only forbidden himself the riot of expression.
However, he shouldn’t inspire his cousin with a passion, nor would she be
able, even should she try, to help him to one.
38.11 Mrs. Touchett hesitated a little.] Mrs. Touchett was prompt.
38.20 “I mean to take her to Paris, to get her some clothes.”] “I mean to take
her to Paris. I mean to get her clothing.”
38.28 as a girl that suggests compassion] as inviting compassion
38.29 what your duty will direct you to do] where you see your duty
38.30 It will direct me to show her four European countries] In showing her
four European countries
38.31 to give her the opportunity] in giving her the opportunity
38.34 even giving her the choice] even allowing her the choice
39.1 that she is a gifted being?] she’s a gifted being?
39.7 I don’t think Isabel finds me one.] I don’t think she finds me one.
39.7 but this one is too clever] but Isabel’s too clever
39.8 I think I amuse her a good deal.] I think I greatly amuse her.
39.8 We get on very well, because I understand her] We get on because I
understand her
39.12 to expect of you!] to expect of you!
39.14 “Do you think her very pretty?”] “Do you think her so very pretty?”
39.22 I told her, she seemed very grateful for the hint] I left her no doubt of it
she seemed very grateful for the service
39.22 I shouldn’t have told her] I shouldn’t have enlightened her
39.27 she is very much mistaken] she’s ridiculously mistaken
39.29 there is no more becoming ornament than an attractive niece] there’s
no greater convenience, in some ways, than an attractive niece
39.34 There are two other sisters] There are two others of them
40.6 a sort of land of emigration,] a land of emigration, of rescue,
40.12 this judicious account of his pretty cousin, by which his interest in her
was not impaired] this judicious report, by which his interest in the subject of it
was not impaired
40.15 but you will be wrong.] but you’ll be wrong. You won’t, I think, in any
way, be easily right about her.
40.16 “Warburton is wrong, then!” Ralph Touchett exclaimed.]
“Warburton’s wrong then!” Ralph rejoicingly exclaimed.
40.26 looked out of the window a little] looked out of the window
40.30 “You have another quarter of an hour, then; tell me some more about
Isabel.” ¶But Mrs. Touchett] “You’ve another quarter of an hour then. Tell me
some more about Isabel.” After which, as Mrs. Touchett
40.32 “Well,” said Ralph,] “Well,” he pursued,
41.2 you have never troubled any one.] you have never troubled any one. It
takes trouble to do that.
41.9 everything that she chooses] everything she chooses
41.12 character was independent] character’s independent
41.13 I mean by my telegrams] I mean in my telegrams
41.22 time-stained oak which was one of the most striking ornaments of
Gardencourt. ¶“You have no plan of marrying her?” he said, smiling.] time-
blackened oak which was one of the most striking features of Gardencourt.
“You’ve no plan of marrying her?” he smiled.
41.23 Marry her?] Marrying her?
41.26 a young man in Boston—] a young man in Boston—!
41.28 “As my father says,” he exclaimed, “they are always engaged!”] “As my
father says, they’re always engaged!”
41.31 he must extract his information about his cousin from the girl herself,
and it soon became evident to him that he should not want for opportunity] he
must satisfy his curiosity at the source, and it soon became evident he should
not want for occasion
41.33 He had, for instance, a good deal of talk with her that same evening,
when the two had been left alone together in the drawing-room.] He had a
good deal of talk with his young kinswoman when the two had been left
together in the drawing-room.
41.36 an hour after this meal was concluded, Mr. and Mrs. Touchett, who
appeared to have exhausted each other’s conversation, withdrew] an hour after
this meal was ended Mr. and Mrs. Touchett, who appeared to have quite
emptied the measure of their forms, withdrew
42.3 she appeared to have no sense of weariness] she appeared in no degree
spent
42.4 knew that she should pay for it] knew she should pay for it
42.5 to carry fatigue to the furthest point,] to carry exhaustion to the furthest
point
42.6 when dissimulation had become impossible] when dissimulation broke
down
42.7 For the present it was perfectly possible; she was interested and excited.]
A fine hypocrisy was for the present possible; she was interested; she was, as she
said to herself, floated.
42.9 a great many of them in the house] a great many in the house
42.9 The best of them] The best
42.13 the visit might have been deferred till the morrow] the visit might have
stood over to the morrow
42.17 she knew that she was eager and that she seemed so; but she could not
help it] she knew she was eager and now seemed so; she couldn’t help it
42.18 her eagerness amused] her pressure amused
42.21 a shining on the polished floor] a sheen on the polished floor
42.23 Isabel, bending toward one picture after another] Isabel, inclining to
one picture after another
42.27 in the middle of the gallery] in the middle of the place
42.28 her figure] her presence
42.32 She was thin, and light, and middling tall; when people had wished to
distinguish her from the other two Miss Archers, they always called her the
thin one.] She was undeniably spare, and ponderably light, and proveably tall;
when people had wished to distinguish her from the other two Miss Archers
they had always called her the willowy one.
42.34 her light grey eye, a little too keen perhaps in her graver moments, had
an enchanting softness when she smiled] her light grey eyes, a little too firm
perhaps in her graver moments, had an enchanting range of concession
43.3 her cousin answered, laughing] her cousin returned
43.4 “I think I have; most girls seem to me so ignorant,” said Isabel.] “I think I
have; most girls are horridly ignorant.”
43.7 “Ah, some girls are so nice,” murmured Isabel, who preferred not to talk
about herself.] “Ah, some of them would—but the way they’re talked to!”
murmured Isabel, who preferred not to dilate just yet on herself.
43.8 she went on, “Please tell me—isn’t there a ghost?”] “Please tell me—isn’t
there a ghost?” she went on.
43.10 “A spectre, a phantom; we call them ghosts in America.”] “A castle-
spectre, a thing that appears. We call them ghosts in America.”
43.13 It’s not a romantic house] It’s not a romantic old house
43.14 It’s dismally prosaic] It’s a dismally prosaic one
43.29 the gentleman that was on the lawn] the gentleman on the lawn
43.34 “You can’t do better than that; he is a dear old man.”] “You can’t do
better than that. He’s the dearest of the dear.”
44.2 I am said to be too theoretic] I’m said to have too many theories
44.10 she doesn’t expect one to like her; she doesn’t care] she doesn’t expect
one to like her. She doesn’t care
44.11 So you adore her, out of perversity?] So you adore her—out of
perversity?
44.15 “Good heavens, how you see through one!” cried Ralph, with a dismay]
“Good heavens, how you see through one!” he cried with a dismay
44.24 I saw it long ago,” said Ralph, smiling.] I saw it long ago,” said
Ralph.
44.25 “I told you just now I was very fond of knowledge,” the girl answered.]
“I told you just know I’m very fond of knowledge,” Isabel answered.
44.29 Isabel had listened] She had listened
44.33 “I am not afraid,” she said;] “I’m not afraid, you know,” she said:
45.1 “I don’t believe you do,” said Ralph] “I don’t believe you do,” said Ralph
45.6 And she turned away a little.] And she wandered off a little.
45.12 “Never mind what they call you,” he said.] “Never mind what they
call you.
CHAPTER6
46.10 a young lady reputed to have read the classic authors] a creature
reported to have read the classic authors
46.12 averred that Isabel would distinguish herself in print] averred that the
girl would distinguish herself in print
46.20 after you had read the Interviewer, you had no time for anything else]
after you had read the Interviewer you had lost all faith in culture
46.21 Her tendency, however,] Her tendency, with this,
46.22 to bring them up seriously] to bring them up properly
46.25 the girl never attempted to write a book, and had no desire to be an
authoress] the girl had never attempted to write a book and had no desire for
the laurels of authorship
46.26 had none of the consciousness of genius] too little of the consciousness
of genius
47.4 impulsively, she often admired herself] she treated herself to occasions
of homage
47.5 his heroine] his subject
47.8 people who seemed to her to speak with authority] people speaking with
authority
47.10 Every now and then she found out she was wrong] At moments she
discovered she was grotesquely wrong
47.14 it was only on this condition that life was worth living] it was only
under this provision life was worth living
47.18 to cultivate doubt of oneself] to cultivate doubt of one’s self
47.20 to give oneself, in this manner, distinguished company] to give one’s
self, in this manner, distinguished company
47.25 she thought it would be detestable to be afraid] she held it must be
detestable to be afraid
47.32 That always seemed to her the worst thing that could happen to one.]
That always struck her as the worst thing that could happen to her.
47.35 She had no taste for thinking of them, but whenever she looked at them
fixedly she recognised them.] She had no love of their look, but when she fixed
them hard she recognised them.
48.2 it seemed right to scorn them] it seemed indecent not to scorn
them
48.3 a high spirit is the danger of inconsistency] a high spirit was the danger
of inconsistency
48.4 behaviour so anomalous] behaviour so crooked
48.6 young ladies] young women
48.7 would never be observed] would never be noted
48.11 she should find herself] she might find herself
48.11 she might have the pleasure] she should have the pleasure
48.18 the eager and personal young girl] the eager and personal creature of
conditions
48.23 enlightened use of her independence] enlightened use of that state
48.25 She never called it loneliness; she thought that weak; and besides, her
sister Lily constantly urged her to come and stay with her.] She never called it
the state of solitude, much less of singleness; she thought such descriptions
weak, and, besides, her sister Lily constantly urged her to come and abide.
48.27 so laudable an example] so high an example
48.28 a remarkable talent;] an admired ability;
48.30 her letters $...$ were universally admired] her letters $...$ were
universally quoted
48.31 Isabel did not accept them unrestrictedly,] Isabel pronounced them
with confidence “ephemeral,”
48.32 good-humour of her friend] good-humour of the writer
48.35 Henrietta was a great radical] Henrietta was in the van of progress
49.10 a regular reader of the Interviewer] a regular student of the Interviewer
49.15 resign oneself to being trivial and superficial] resign one’s self to being
frivolous and hollow
49.16 Isabel was resolutely determined not to be superficial.] Isabel was
stoutly determined not to be hollow.
49.17 If one should wait expectantly and trustfully,] If one should wait with
the right patience
49.19 a collection of opinions on the question of marriage] a collection of
views on the subject of marriage
49.20 a conviction that it was very vulgar to think too much about it] a
conviction of the vulgarity of thinking too much of it
49.23 From lapsing into a state of eagerness on this point she earnestly
prayed that she might be delivered; she held that a woman ought to be able
to make up her life in singleness,] From lapsing into eagerness on this point she
earnestly prayed she might be delivered; she held that a woman ought to be
able to live to herself, in the absence of exceptional flimsiness,
49.26 something cold and stiff,] something cold and dry
49.28 the subject of possible husbands] the article of possible husbands
49.29 an expenditure of imagination,] a ruinous expenditure,
49.35 it ended by frightening her] it ended in alarms
50.1 you could have made her blush, any day in the year, by telling her that
she was selfish] you could have made her colour, any day in the year, by calling
her a rank egoist
50.3 planning out her own development, desiring her own perfection, obser-
ving her own progress] planning out her development, desiring her perfection,
observing her progress
50.4 Her nature had for her own imagination a certain garden-like quality]
Her nature had, in her conceit, a certain garden-like quality
50.7 one’s mind] one’s spirit
50.9 those of her virginal soul] those of her remarkable soul
50.10 places that were not gardens at all] places which were not gardens at all
50.12 the current of that easy eagerness] the current of that repaid curiosity
50.17 her absorbing happiness appear to her a kind of immodesty] her fine,
full consciousness appear a kind of immodesty
50.18 for oneself] for one’s self
50.22 This was necessary] This impression was necessary
50.24 an object of special attention] a subject of special attention
50.26 as entertained as a child] as diverted as a child
50.28 Paris, not London, was her father’s Mecca.] Paris, not London, was her
father’s Mecca, and into many of his interests there his children had naturally
not entered.
50.29 The impressions of that time, moreover, had become faint and remote]
The images of that time moreover had grown faint and remote
51.3 in the thick mild air all shrillness dropped out of conversation] in the
thick mild air all friction dropped out of contact and all shrillness out of talk
51.9 sitting placidly with folded hands, like a good old man who had done
his work and received his wages, and was trying to grow used to weeks and
months made up only of off-days] sitting with folded hands like a placid,
homely household god, a god of service, who had done his work and received
his wages and was trying to grow used to weeks and months made up only of
off-days
51.13 much of the vivacity observable in that of the young ladies of her
country] much of the “point” observable in that of the young ladies of her
country
51.15 Like the majority of American girls,] Like the mass of American girls
51.21 that artless vividness] that prompt vividness
51.32 he wished she would ask something of him] and wished she would ask it
of him
51.33 But Isabel asked nothing but questions; it is true that of these she asked
a great many.] She would ask nothing but questions; it is true that of these she
asked a quantity.
51.35 interrogation sometimes came in forms that puzzled him] her pressure
sometimes came in forms that puzzled him
52.4 in asking to be enlightened on these points she usually inquired whether
they corresponded with the descriptions in the books] Copy text in asking to be
enlightened on these points she usually inquired whether they correspond with
the descriptions in the books; in begging to be enlightened on these points she
usually enquired whether they corresponded with the descriptions in the books
52.6 the shawl that was spread across his legs] the shawl spread across his legs
52.18 several improvements that I should like to see introduced] several
improvements I should like to see introduced
52.31 “Oh, I am by no means sure I shall like it,” said Isabel, somewhat
judicially.] “Oh, I’m by no means sure it will satisfy me,” Isabel judicially
emphasised.
53.8 She was very positive, very positive; but she was not the sort of person
that you could depend on her testimony.] She was very positive, quite up to
everything; but she was not the sort of person you could depend on for
evidence.
53.8 Too much imagination—I suppose, that was it.] Too free a fancy—I
suppose that was it.
53.21 we wouldn’t have him over there!] we wouldn’t have him over there at
any price.
53.26 their position is better in the upper class] their position is better in the
upper and even to some extent in the middle
53.27 “Dear me!” Isabel exclaimed] “Gracious,” Isabel exclaimed
54.1 said the young girl, quickly] said the girl quickly
54.14 I shall not have success if they are conventional. I am not in the least
conventional.] I shall not have success if they’re too stupidly conventional. I’m
not in the least stupidly conventional.
CHAPTER7
55.25 it seemed to her that her aunt might make better use] it seemed to her
her aunt might make better use
56.4 there are as many points of view in the world as there are people of
sense] there are as many points of view in the world as there are people of sense
to take them
56.13 a large licence to violent statements] a large licence to extravagance
56.19 he exercised his wit indiscriminately] he exercised his wit indifferently
56.21 his anomalous mother] his fantastic mother
56.32 he assured her that they were a very dismal place] he assured her they
were a very dismal place
56.35 taps with the ferule] Copy text taps with the ferrule; taps with the
ferule
57.2 a patriotism so fervid that it scorched] a patriotism so heated that it
scorched
57.3 dressed, in the height of the prevailing fashion] dressed, on the lines of
the prevailing fashion
57.6 she should be so] she should really be so
57.12 to torment her] to work her up
57.18 It seemed to her that he was talking] It seemed to her he was talking
57.20 she said to him once] she observed to him once
57.35 Poor Ralph for many weeks had been steeped in melancholy] Poor
Ralph had been for many weeks steeped in melancholy
58.5 he appeared tolerably comfortable] he appeared disburdened of pain
58.9 his own name would be the first called] his own name would be the first
grimly called
58.14 Ralph was indeed mightily disgusted] Ralph lost indeed his one
inspiration
58.20 the pain of loss] the felt wound
58.21 his own forecast of an uncompleted career] his own forecast of an early
end
58.26 to hope that the latter might be vouchsafed to Mr. Touchett] to hope
the latter might be vouchsafed to Mr. Touchett
58.28 It even suggested that there might be a compensation] It even
suggested there might be a compensation
58.30 whether he were falling in love with this spontaneous young woman]
whether he were harbouring “love” for this spontaneous young woman
58.31 he decided that on the whole he was not] he judged that on the whole he
was not
58.34 a thoroughly interesting woman] a really interesting little figure
58.35 how Lord Warburton had found it out] how their neighbour had found
it out
59.2 Ralph was conscious that she was an entertainment] Ralph was con-
scious she was an entertainment
59.3 “A character like that,” he said to himself, “is the finest thing in nature.]
“A character like that,” he said to himself—“a real little passionate force to see
at play is the finest thing in nature.
59.5 so well-treated where one least looked for it] so well treated where one
had least looked for it
59.7 that something agreeable would happen] that anything pleasant would
happen
59.31 a rather grim visitor] rather a grim visitor
59.32 duty and inclination were harmoniously mingled] duty and inclination
were harmoniously mixed
60.14 they usually found that tea had been served upon the lawn, and that
Mrs. Touchett had not absolved herself from the obligation of handing her
husband his cup] they usually found tea had been served on the lawn and that
Mrs. Touchett had not shrunk from the extremity of handing her husband
his cup
60.17 that appearance of extraordinary meditation with which some ladies
contemplate the movement of their needles] that appearance of rare profun-
dity with which some ladies consider the movement of their needles
60.19 The two young people, after spending an hour upon the river] The two
young persons, after spending an hour on the river
60.26 he had made indeed a tolerably vivid impression on her mind,] he had
indeed rather sharply registered himself on her fine sense
60.28 She had hoped that she should see him again] She had hoped she
should see him again
60.31 the place itself was so delightful, her uncle was such a perfection of an
uncle, and Ralph was so unlike any cousin she had ever encountered—her
view of cousins being rather monotonous] the place itself was sovereign, her
uncle was more and more a sort of golden grandfather, and Ralph was unlike
any cousin she had ever encountered—her idea of cousins having tended to
gloom
60.33 a sense of vacancy in the prospect] a hint of vacancy in the view
61.5 make the young girl acquainted with English society, she encouraged the
hospitable impulse and promised, in advance, to be delighted] make her
acquainted with English society, she encouraged the hospitable impulse and
promised in advance to hurl herself into the fray
61.6 Little $...$ had come of Ralph’s offers] Little $...$ had come of his offers
61.8 the labour of entertaining his cousin] the labour of providing for his
companion
61.12 English society illustrated by figures] English society illustrated by
eminent cases
61.20 I am sure he is good] I’m sure he’s nice
61.21 Yes, he is very good.] Yes, he’s very nice.
61.32 with his deep, agreeable laugh] with his sonorous mirth
62.7 Her desire to think well of herself always needed to be supported by
proof; though it is possible that this fact is not the sign of a milder egotism.]
Her desire to think well of herself had at least the element of humility that it
always needed to be supported by proof.
62.11 he addressed much of his conversation to Isabel] he addressed many of
his remarks to Isabel
62.13 the first impression he had made upon her was pleasant,] the first
impression he had made on her had had weight,
62.15 she thought him quite one of the most delectable persons she had met]
she scarce fell short of seeing him—though quite without luridity—as a hero of
romance
62.17 a quickened consciousness of the pleasantness of life] a quickened
consciousness of possible felicities
62.23 she said to Isabel] observed to Isabel
62.30 Ralph will light my candle,” said Isabel, smiling.] Ralph will light my
candle,” Isabel gaily engaged.
62.34 Mrs. Touchett fixed her bright little eyes upon him for a moment, and
then transferred them to her niece.] Mrs. Touchett fixed her bright little eyes
upon him a moment and transferred them coldly to her niece.
62.36 You are not—you are not at Albany, my dear.] You’re not—you’re not
at your blest Albany, my dear.
63.4 “My dear Mrs. Touchett,” Lord Warburton murmured.] “My dear
Mrs. Touchett!” Lord Warburton murmured.
63.9 “Perhaps I had better go to bed!” the visitor exclaimed.] “Perhaps I had
better go to bed!” the visitor suggested.
63.12 “Oh, if it’s necessary, I will stay up till midnight,” she said.] “Oh, if it’s
necessary, I’ll stay up till midnight.”
63.14 it had seemed to him that her temper was stirred] it had seemed to him
her temper was involved
63.15 if he had expected an exhibition of temper,] if he had expected anything
of a flare
63.21 “Of course you are displeased at my interfering with you,” said
Mrs. Touchett.] “Of course you’re vexed at my interfering with you,” said
Mrs. Touchett.
63.23 Isabel reflected a moment. ¶“I am not displeased, but I am surprised—
and a good deal puzzled.] Isabel considered. “I’m not vexed, but I’m surprised—
and a good deal mystified.
63.25 Young girls here don’t sit alone with the gentlemen] Young girls here—
in decent houses—don’t sit alone with the gentlemen
63.30 I see you taking what seems to be too much liberty] I see you taking
what seems to me too much liberty
63.32 You are too fond of your liberty.] You’re too fond of your own ways.
63.33 Yes, I think I am very fond of it.] Yes, I think I’m very fond of them.
CHAPTER8
64.1 As she was much interested in the picturesque,] As she was devoted to
romantic effects
64.3 his house, which was a very curious old place] his house, a very curious
old place
64.5 his willingness to attend upon the ladies] his willingness to attend the
ladies
64.8 having interrogated him] having sounded him
64.11 as her companion was a copious talker, she asked him] as her compa-
nion was a copious talker she urged him
64.12 He told her that he had four sisters and two brothers,] He told her he
had four sisters and two brothers
64.15 simple and respectable and trustworthy] very decent and pleasant
64.16 to hope that Miss Archer should know them well] to hope Miss Archer
might know them well
64.18 settled in the parsonage at Lockleigh, which was rather a largeish
parish] settled in the family living, that of Lockleigh, which was a heavy,
sprawling parish
64.21 opinions that Isabel had often heard expressed] opinions Isabel had
often heard expressed
64.24 he assured her that she was quite mistaken] he assured her she was
quite mistaken
64.27 she had already thought several of them over very attentively] she had
already thought several of the questions involved over very attentively
65.4 to pretend they know more] to pretend they knew more
65.6 a considerable part of it] a considerable slice of it
65.11 “I don’t think I will pay any more,” said Warburton] “I don’t think I
shall pay any more,” said her friend
65.20 though she was married only the other day] though married but the
other day
65.31 my national costume] my native costume
66.8 Although he said the most interesting and entertaining things, Isabel
perceived that he never said them to exhibit himself] Although he gave the
most interesting and thrilling glimpses Isabel felt he never did it to exhibit
himself
66.9 he had a great good fortune,] he had had rare chances and had tumbled
in, as she put it, for high prizes,
66.12 His composition was a mixture of good-humoured manly force and a
modesty that at times was almost boyish] His quality was a mixture of the effect
of rich experience—oh, so easily come by!—with a modesty at times almost
boyish
66.15 a tone of kindness which was not boyish, inasmuch as there was a good
deal of reflection and of conscience in it] a tone of responsible kindness
66.18 “I like him too—I love him well,” said Ralph.] “I like him too—I love
him well,” Ralph returned.
66.21 to be everything] to be everything
66.22 “Oh, he’s in a bad way,” Ralph insisted.] “Oh, he’s in a bad way!” Ralph
insisted.
66.24 he’s detestably robust] he’s detestably sound
66.33 For me, I could take the poor fellow very seriously;] For me, in his
place, I could be as solemn as a statue of Buddha.
67.1 and everything else] and indeed about everything in the world
67.4 an old-fashioned and narrow-minded person] a pampered bigot
67.9 being a man of imagination] being a man of a good deal of charming
taste
67.10 a man of his opportunities] a being of his opportunities
67.18 “I think he is charming,” Isabel answered.] Isabel was prompt. “I think
he’s charming.”
67.19 “He’s a fine fellow,” said Mr. Touchett] “He’s a nice person,” said
Mr. Touchett
67.23 a rather sad account of Lord Warburton] rather a sad account of Lord
Warburton
67.25 you must remember that Ralph is rather fanciful] you must remember
that Ralph must talk
67.26 He thinks Lord Warburton is too radical—or not radical enough!] He
thinks your friend’s too subversive—or not subversive enough!
68.14 I forget whether you are a liberal or a conservative.] I forget whether
you’re on the side of the old or on the side of the new.
68.16 “I am both. I think I am a little of everything.] “I’m on the side of both. I
guess I’m a little on the side of everything.
68.17 I should be a conservative] I should be a high, proud loyalist
68.18 to behave so picturesquely.] to behave so exquisitely. I mean so
picturesquely.
68.23 the pleasure of seeing a revolution here just now] the pleasure of going
gracefully to the guillotine here just now
68.23 If you want to see one,] If you want to see a big outbreak
68.32 But then, I ain’t a lord] And then I ain’t a lord
69.2 Well, they are very conscientious] Well, they want to feel earnest
69.7 they don’t affect their position] don’t damage their position
69.11 his mild, reflective, optimistic accent] his quaint distinctness
69.16 “I don’t believe Lord Warburton’s a humbug,” she said; “I don’t care
what the others are.] “I don’t believe Lord Warburton’s a humbug; I don’t care
what the others are.
69.20 He owns fifty thousand acres of the soil of this little island.] He owns
fifty thousand acres of the soil of this little island and ever so many other things
besides.
69.22 He has very cultivated tastes] He has elegant tastes
69.23 The most cultivated] The most elegant
69.24 a great deal of entertainment] a great deal of pleasure
69.27 he has got so many others] he has so many others
69.32 Isabel exclaimed.] Isabel sighed.
69.36 a touch of sadness] a touch of melancholy
CHAPTER9
71.3 to have a very original stamp] to show a most original stamp
71.4 when she spoke of them to her cousin as original,] when she described
them to her cousin by that term
71.5 for that there were fifty thousand] since there were fifty thousand
71.9 the kindest eyes in the world] eyes like the balanced basins, the circles of
“ornamental water,” set, in parterres, among the geraniums
71.14 suspected that it might become a fault of her own] suspected it as a
tendency of her own
71.16 Their eyes, which Isabel admired so much,] Yes, their eyes, which Isabel
admired,
71.17 of a generous roundness] also of a generous roundness
71.21 come to lunch] come to luncheon
71.23 whether she wouldn’t come over] if she wouldn’t come over
71.25 and perhaps she would come] so perhaps she would come
71.30 Her visitors blushed] Her visitors flushed
72.1 they would think she was quizzing them] they would think she was in
some wild, free manner practising on them
72.15 a want of vivacity] a want of play of mind
72.15 that they were capable] they were capable
72.16 Before lunch she was alone] Before luncheon she was alone
72.18 “Is it true that your brother is such a great radical?”] “Is it true your
brother’s such a great radical?”
72.26 he was evidently trying hard] he was clearly trying hard
72.27 Ralph was playing with one of the dogs] Ralph had met the frank
advances of one of the dogs
72.28 which the temperature of an English August, in the ancient, spacious
room,] that the temperature of an English August, in the ancient expanses,
72.35 having to give up all this!”] having to give up all this.”
73.5 “Let them for nothing?” Isabel inquired.] “Let them for nothing?” Isabel
demanded.
73.7 “Ah, I am afraid he is an impostor!” Isabel exclaimed.] “Ah, I’m afraid he
is an impostor!” Isabel returned.
73.9 Her companions, evidently, were rapidly getting bewildered.] Her com-
panions, evidently, had lost themselves.
73.12 “It’s the first position in the county.”] “It’s the first position in this part
of the country.”
73.13 “I suspect you think me very irreverent,” Isabel took occasion to
observe.] “I dare say you think me very irreverent,” Isabel took occasion to
remark.
73.16 very good] beautifully good
73.21 I should wish to be a conservative. I should wish to keep everything.] I
should wish to fight to the death: I mean for the heritage of the past. I should
hold it tight.
73.26 after lunch] after luncheon
73.31 it seemed to Isabel a castle in a fairy-tale] it affected the young visitor as
a castle in a legend
74.1 a search for theological characteristics] a search for a rich ecclesiasticism
74.1 The characteristics of the Vicar] The marks of the Vicar
74.3 a tendency to abundant laughter] a tendency to indiscriminate laughter
74.11 engaging his youngest visitor in a stroll somewhat apart from the
others] engaging his least familiar guest in a stroll apart from the others
74.18 the old house] the old barrack
74.23 excuse me if I say] pardon me if I say
75.3 “But, all the same, I don’t think he would like me to keep coming to
Gardencourt.”] “But, I nevertheless don’t think he’d like me to keep coming to
Gardencourt.”
75.11 “But you have charmed me, Miss Archer,” he added.] “But you’ve
charmed me, Miss Archer.”
75.24 you are always judging people] you’re always summing people up
75.31 I want very much to see foreign lands as well.] I want to see as many
countries as I can.
75.36 —vast designs!]—vast designs.
76.10 “Well, you think us picturesque] “Well, you think us ‘quaint’
76.11 I won’t be thought picturesque,] I won’t be thought ‘quaint,’
76.12 one of the most picturesque things] one of the quaintest things
76.14 Lord Warburton was silent a moment.] Lord Warburton was briefly
silent.
76.16 “You only care to amuse yourself!”] “You only care to amuse yourself.”
76.20 the English were a highly eccentric people;] the English are a highly
eccentric people,
76.21 they were, at bottom,] they are at bottom
76.22 to make a scene] to make her a scene
77.4 her coldness was not coquetry—a quality that she possessed] her cold-
ness was not the calculation of her effect—a game she played
CHAPTER10
78.20 Isabel did not show this letter to her uncle] Isabel judged best not to
show this letter to her uncle
78.24 she won’t reproduce me] she won’t show me up
78.30 and this enterprising young woman lost no time in signifying her
intention of arriving] and this alert young woman lost no time in announcing
her prompt approach
79.1 from the metropolis] from that centre
79.4 “Shall I love her, or shall I hate her?” asked Ralph, while they stood on
the platform, before the advent of the train.] “Shall I love her or shall I hate
her?” Ralph asked while they moved along the platform.
79.12 I am very curious to see her,” Ralph declared.] I’m very curious to see
her,” Ralph conceded.
79.14 interviewing requires bravery] crimes of violence and attacks on the
person require more or less pluck
79.15 Do you suppose she will interview me?] Do you suppose she’ll inter-
view me?
79.20 “You think she is capable of it, then.”] “You think she’s capable of
it then?”
79.32 Miss Stackpole, promptly descending, proved to be, as Isabel had said,
decidedly pretty. She was a fair, plump person] Miss Stackpole, promptly
descending, proved, as Isabel had promised, quite delicately, even though
rather provincially, fair. She was a neat, plump person
80.2 who was somewhat disconcerted] a little arrested
80.3 which seemed to indicate] which hinted
80.5 She was very well dressed,] She rustled, she shimmered,
80.6 she was scrupulously, fastidiously neat] she was as crisp and new and
comprehensive as a first issue before the folding
80.7 she carried not an ink-stain] she had probably no misprint
80.8 —a voice not rich, but loud, though after she had taken her place,]—a
voice not rich but loud; yet after she had taken her place
80.10 she struck him, rather to his surprise, as not an abundant talker] she
struck him as not all in the large type, the type of horrid “headings,” that he had
expected
80.12 with a great deal of precision and distinctness] with copious
lucidity
80.15 her conversational powers] her confidence in her powers
80.17 “Well, I should like to know $...$,” she said.] “Well, I should like to
know $...$,” she broke out.
80.18 “Talk to us anyhow, $...$,” Ralph answered, liberally.] “Talk to us
anyhow $...$,” Ralph liberally answered.
80.19 She fixed her eyes upon him] She fixed her eyes on him
80.20 large, polished buttons;] large polished buttons—buttons that might
have fixed the elastic loops of some tense receptacle:
80.21 upon the pupil] on the pupil
80.24 vaguely embarrassed and uncomfortable] vaguely embarrassed—less
inviolate, more dishonoured, than he liked
80.26 it never wholly disappeared] it never wholly lapsed
80.30 “Well, if you can change $...$,” Miss Stackpole rejoined.] “Well, if you
can change $...$,” Miss Stackpole returned.
81.1 “He is what is called a cosmopolitan,” Isabel suggested.] “He’s what’s
called a cosmopolite,” Isabel suggested.
81.8 with his mild, wise, aged, innocent voice] with his aged, innocent voice
81.14 a most lovely group] a lovely group
81.17 to sympathise with the atmosphere] to accord with the atmosphere
81.18 But I suppose I shall make my own atmosphere.] But I suppose I shall
make my own atmosphere. That’s the true way—then you can breathe.
81.26 Isabel spent many hours with her friend, who $...$ was of an eminently
social tendency.] Isabel spent many hours with her friend, who $...$ depre-
cated, in fact defied, isolation.
81.27 occasion to request] occasion to desire
81.29 engaged upon a letter] engaged on a letter
82.29 it appeared to her so strange that a nature in which she found so much
to esteem should exhibit such extraordinary disparities] it struck her as strange
that a nature in which she found so much to esteem should break down so in
spots
82.32 while Isabel marvelled more than ever at her inconsistency] while
Isabel found her more than ever inconsequent
83.2 I will put it in a letter] I’ll put it in somewhere
83.5 a newspaper-correspondent in want of material] a newspaper-lady in
want of matter
83.7 don’t you know some place I can describe?] don’t you know some place I
can describe?
83.10 “Ah, $...$ that is just the place for me!” Miss Stackpole exclaimed.] “Ah,
$...$ that’s just the place for me!” Miss Stackpole cried.
83.15 “Don’t do that,” her companion begged] “Don’t do that,” her compan-
ion pleaded
83.17 “An Englishman is never so natural $...$,” Isabel rejoined.] “An
Englishman’s never so natural $...$,” Isabel declared.
83.19 her cousin had fallen in love with their visitor] her cousin had, according to her prophecy, lost his heart to their visitor
83.23 Her society had a less insoluble quality] Her presence proved somehow
less irreducible to soft particles
83.24 the perfect adequacy] the perfect solubility
83.26 the correspondent of the Interviewer made him laugh a good deal] the
correspondent of the Interviewer prompted mirth in him
83.27 abundant laughter should be the embellishment of the remainder of his
days] the crescendo of mirth should be the flower of his declining days
83.28 Henrietta, on her side, did not quite justify] Henrietta, on her side,
failed a little to justify
83.31 it would be superficial on her part not to solve] it would be almost
immoral not to work out
83.34 “He does nothing,” said Isabel, smiling; “he’s a gentleman of leisure.”]
“He does nothing,” smiled Isabel; “he’s a gentleman of large leisure.”
83.35 like a cotton-mill] like a car-conductor
84.5 —he would like to drown her] and would like to drown her
84.12 I have some delicious prejudices.] I’ve some delicious ones.
84.14 for I render your cousin the service] as I render her the service
84.18 to shrink from no trouble] to shrink from no effort
84.29 conventional phrases] conventional terms
84.30 its brilliant deliberation] conventional terms
84.32 a Transatlantic journal] a journal of the other world
85.2 “I seldom spend it so agreeably,” said Ralph.] “I seldom spend it so
agreeably.”
85.6 a small Watteau] a small Lancret
85.12 he saw that she had not apprehended the subject] he saw she had
missed the subject
85.14 “I don’t see how you can reconcile it to your conscience,” she said.] “I
don’t see how you can reconcile it to your conscience.”
85.20 Ralph meditated, with a gentle smile.] Ralph meditated with a mild
smile.
85.25 It’s antecedent to choice.] They’re both antecedent to choice—elements
of one’s composition that are not to be eliminated.
85.26 you would give it up if you could?] you’ve tried and been worsted.
85.30 “Ah, set it down a little to my natural charm!” Ralph urged.] “Ah, set it
down a little to my natural charm!” Ralph sighed.
86.9 “If it depends upon my heart——”] “If it depends upon my heart—!”
86.10 “Haven’t you got any?”] “Haven’t you got a heart?”
86.19 “Oh, pshaw!” Henrietta exclaimed impatiently.] “Oh pshaw!” Henrietta
groaned.
86.27 a very good fellow.] a very good “sort.”
86.29 she was brave, and there is always something fine about that] she was
brave: she went into cages, she flourished lashes, like a spangled lion-tamer
86.32 upon an unencumbered young man] on an unencumbered young man
87.4 Miss Stackpole’s brilliant eyes expanded still further.] Miss Stackpole’s
ocular surfaces unwinkingly caught the sun.
87.6 Of course I have got as good a right to marry as any one else.”] Of course
I’ve as good a right to marry as any one else.”
87.10 on the day that I tell you] on the day I tell you
87.17 “I have not fallen in love with your friend,” Ralph said] “I’ve not
conceived a passion for your friend,” Ralph said
87.27 a burst of resounding laughter] a luxury of laughter
87.35 It was unkind to me.] It was unkind to me.
88.3 it’s hers to see I do mine!] it’s hers, in general, to see I do mine!
88.7 She thinks it’s very frivolous for you to be single; that’s what she meant
to express to you.] She thinks it’s unworthy of you to keep so many things to
yourself. That’s what she wanted to express.
88.10 Excuse my superficiality.] Forgive my depravity.
88.19 a rather pretentious ornament] rather a pretentious ornament
88.34 But she suggests it; she reminds me of it.”] But she suggests it; she
vividly figures it.”
88.36 it is on those very grounds that I object to her] it is on those very
grounds I object to her
89.2 If a thing strikes me in a certain way, I like it. I don’t want to
boast,] If a thing strikes me with a certain intensity I accept it. I don’t
want to swagger,
89.7 I am immensely struck with her; not so much for herself as what stands
behind her] I’m straightway convinced by her; not so much in respect to herself
as in respect to what masses behind her
89.12 the blue Pacific!] the green Pacific!
89.13 —excuse my simile—] —pardon my simile—
89.19 “I am not sure the Pacific is blue,”] “I’m not sure the Pacific’s so green
as that,”
89.20 Henrietta, however, is fragrant—Henrietta is decidedly fragrant!]
Henrietta, however, does smell of the Future—it almost knocks one down!
CHAPTER11
90.5 too perverted a representative of human nature] too perverted a repre-
sentative of the nature of man
90.8 the young lady found in her relations with him no obstacle to the
exercise of that somewhat aggressive frankness which was the social expression
of her nature] the young lady found in renewed contact with him no obstacle to
the exercise of her genius for unshrinking enquiry, the general application of
her confidence
90.11 that fine freedom of composition] that free play of intelligence
90.12 whose general tone] whose noble tone
90.16 to pay a certain deference as mistress of the house] to “allow” as
mistress of the house]
90.16 She presently discovered, however,] She presently discovered, in
truth,
90.19 Mrs. Touchett had spoken of her to Isabel as a “newspaper-woman,”
and expressed some surprise] Mrs. Touchett had defined her to Isabel as both
an adventuress and a bore—adventuresses usually giving one more of a thrill;
she had expressed some surprise
90.20 but she had immediately added] yet had immediately added
90.22 she never undertook to like them all,] she had never undertaken to like
them all
90.27 I don’t like her tone.] everything about her displeases me;
90.27 and she looks at me too hard] and looks at one as if one wanted to look
at her—which one doesn’t
90.29 I detest the style of manners that such a way of living produces] I detest
the manners and the liberties of such places
91.1 Miss Stackpole knows that I detest boarding-house civilisation]
Miss Stackpole knows I detest boarding-house civilisation
91.11 had acquired a large familiarity with the technical hospitality of her
country] had acquainted herself, in the western world, with every form of
caravansary
91.13 Mrs. Touchett recorded a conviction that they were the worst]
Mrs. Touchett, fresh from a renewed struggle with them, recorded a conviction
that they were the worst
91.25 “They are the companions of freemen,” Henrietta rejoined.] “They’re
the companions of freemen,” Henrietta retorted.
91.32 “If you have not good servants, you are miserable,” Mrs. Touchett said,
serenely.] “If you’ve not good servants you’re miserable,” Mrs. Touchett
serenely said.
92.2 cried Mrs. Touchett, with a laugh.] proclaimed Mrs. Touchett with much meaning.
92.5 you would make a very poor butler] you wouldn’t at all have the tenue
92.12 she privately suspected of being a mysterious survival] she privately
judged to be a mysterious survival
92.15 before she said to Isabel in the morning, while they were alone
together,] before she took occasion to say to Isabel:
92.16 whether you are growing faithless?] if you are growing faithless?
92.34 for a period of time which tried Isabel’s patience, so that our heroine
said at last—] for a period which tried Isabel’s patience, so that our heroine
added at last:
93.4 “Ah!” Isabel exclaimed, quickly.] “Ah!” Isabel responded.
93.5 You say that right.] You say that right.
93.10 Isabel was silent a moment.] Isabel waited.
93.11 she had coloured a little, and now her blush was slowly fading] she had
turned a little pale
93.22 I never saw an ugly man look so handsome!] I never saw an ugly man
look so handsome.
93.24 “There is nothing so simple as a great passion.”] “There’s nothing so
simplifying as a grand passion.”
93.25 It is not a great passion] It’s not a grand passion
93.28 “I shall say it better to Mr. Goodwood himself!”] “I shall say it better to
Mr. Goodwood himself.”
93.36 Miss Stackpole exclaimed, with a laugh] Miss Stackpole exclaimed with
a slightly harsh hilarity
94.1 Isabel failed even to smile in reply;] Isabel failed even to smile back
94.9 “Yes; but they shouldn’t interfere with the old ones.”] “Yes; but they
shouldn’t interfere with the old ones when the old ones have been the right ones.”
94.12 “If you mean that I had any idea with regard to Mr. Goodwood——”
And then she paused; Henrietta’s bright eyes seemed to her to grow enor-
mous.] “If you mean that I had any idea with regard to Mr. Goodwood—!” But
she faltered before her friend’s implacable glitter.
94.13 “My dear child, you certainly encouraged him,” said Miss Stackpole.]
“My dear child, you certainly encouraged him.”
94.16 Isabel appeared for the moment to be on the point of denying this
charge, but instead of this she presently answered—“It is very true; I did
encourage him.” And then she inquired whether her companion] Isabel
made for the moment as if to deny this charge; instead of which, however,
she presently answered: “It’s very true. I did encourage him.” And then she
asked if her companion
94.20 This inquiry was a concession to curiosity, for she did not enjoy
discussing the gentleman with Henrietta Stackpole, and she thought that in
her treatment of the subject this faithful friend lacked delicacy.] It was a
concession to her curiosity, for she disliked discussing the subject and found
Henrietta wanting in delicacy.
94.23 He is a man of action.] He is a man of high, bold action.
94.24 whatever he does will be right] whatever he does will always be right
94.25 “I quite believe that,” said Isabel.] “I quite believe that.”
94.26 to hear this rich assertion made] to hear this declaration
94.27 “Ah, you do care for him,” Henrietta murmured.] “Ah, you do care for
him!” her visitor rang out.
94.30 “Whatever he does will be right,” Isabel repeated. “When a man is of
that supernatural mould, what does it matter to him whether one cares for
him?”] “Whatever he does will always be right,” Isabel repeated. “When a
man’s of that infallible mould what does it matter to him what one feels?”
94.33 said Isabel, smiling a little] said Isabel with a cold smile
94.35 “Well, I don’t care; you have changed,” she replied.] “Well, I don’t care;
you have changed.
95.3 “I believe that you hope it about as much as I believe that he is capable of
it.”] “I believe you hope it about as much as I believe him capable of it.”
95.4 our heroine made no rejoinder] our heroine made no return
95.5 the feeling of alarm] the alarm
95.9 Alarm is perhaps a violent term to apply to the uneasiness with which
she regarded this contingency; but her uneasiness was keen, and there were
various good reasons for it.] omitted
95.11 she communicated her disbelief to her friend; but for the next forty-
eight hours] she communicated her disbelief to her friend. For the next forty-
eight hours
95.12 The feeling was oppressive] The feeling pressed upon her
95.15 Her suspense, however, was dissipated] Her suspense indeed was
dissipated
95.21 a very graceful and harmonious image] a graceful and harmonious
image
95.28 when she felt heavy-hearted] when heavy-hearted
95.30 Of late, however,] Of late,
95.34 with her eyes fixed upon the cool green turf of the lawn] her eyes bent
on the cool green turf of the lawn
96.3 was addressed in a hand that she knew—that she seemed to know all the
better, indeed, as the writer had been present to her mind when the letter was
delivered. This document proved to be short, and I may give it entire.] was
addressed in a hand she knew—that came into her vision, already so held by
him, with the vividness of the writer’s voice or his face. This document proved
short and may be given entire.
96.15 because you are not unreasonable. No, you are not, and you never will
be.] because that’s not your character. No, you are not, and you never will be,
arbitrary or capricious.
96.21 it is only because you are here. I have been to England before, but I have
never enjoyed it much.] it is only because it holds you. I have been to England
before, but have never enjoyed it much.
96.25 Isabel read Mr. Goodwood’s letter with such profound attention]
Isabel read this missive with such deep attention
96.27 folded the paper] folded it
CHAPTER12
97.3 half surprised at her self-possession] half surprised at her coolness
97.8 “I was just going in-doors,” she said.] “I was just going indoors.”
97.9 it is much pleasanter here] it’s much jollier here
97.7 to satisfy her curiosity regarding it] to satisfy her curiosity about it
97.21 this idea of Lord Warburton’s making love to her] the idea of Lord
Warburton’s “making up” to her
97.28 because a declaration from such a source would point more questions
than it would answer] the fact of a declaration from such a source carrying with
it really more questions than it would answer
97.29 a strong impression of Lord Warburton’s being a personage,] a strong
impression of his being a “personage,”
97.30 examining the idea] examining the image so conveyed
97.30 At the risk of making the reader smile,] At the risk of adding to the
evidence of her self-sufficiency
98.3 there had been moments when the intimation that she was admired by a
“personage” struck her as an aggression which she would rather have been
spared. She had never known a personage before; there were no personages in
her native land.] there had been moments when this possibility of admiration
by a personage represented to her an aggression almost to the degree of an
affront, quite to the degree of an inconvenience. She had never yet known a
personage; there had been no personages, in this sense, in her life; there were
probably none such at all in her native land.
98.5 When she had thought of such matters as this, she had done so on the
basis of character—of what one liked in a gentleman’s mind] When she had
thought of individual eminence she had thought of it on the basis of character
and wit—of what one might like in a gentleman’s mind
98.6 her visions of a completed life] her visions of a completed consciousness
98.8 pleased her soul] pleased her sublime soul
98.16 an appreciation which the girl $...$ felt that she lacked the patience to
bestow. Of course, there would be a short cut to it, and as Lord Warburton was
evidently a very fine fellow, it would probably also be a safe cut. Isabel was able
to say all this to herself, but she was unable to feel the force of it.] an
appreciation that the girl $...$ felt she lacked patience to bestow. He appeared
to demand of her something that no one else, as it were, had presumed to do.
98.18 the system in which he lived and moved] the system in which he rather
invidiously lived and moved
98.19 told her to resist—it murmured to her] told her to resist—murmured
to her
98.22 such a man as Lord Warburton,] such a man
98.25 as an incumbrance] as a complication of every hour
98.27 there was something heavy and rigid which would make it unaccept-
able] there was something stiff and stupid which would make it a burden
98.30 The letter that she carried] The letter she carried
98.32 this simple young lady] this simple young woman
99.13 which, superficially, had nothing to recommend it] which had super-
ficially nothing to recommend it
99.17 they revealed themselves with a certain vividness] they showed as
distinct and unimportant
99.24 had looked these things well in the face, and then he had dis-
missed them] he had looked these things well in the face and then had
dismissed them
99.32 “It would have been pleasant if for nothing else than that it brought me
here,” Lord Warburton answered.] “It would have been pleasant if for nothing
else than that it brought me here.”
99.34 some demand of her] some appeal to her
100.2 embellished by a local nobleman] embellished by a “great” (as she
supposed) nobleman
100.5 if she were now the heroine] if she was now the heroine
100.7 “I care nothing for Gardencourt,” said Lord Warburton;] “I care
nothing for Gardencourt,” said her companion.
100.12 she had no doubt whatever that he was serious] she had no doubt
whatever that he himself was
100.14 those he himself had just uttered would have excited surprise on the
part of the public at large] those he had just uttered would have excited surprise
on the part of a vulgar world
100.16 Lord Warburton was not a frivolous person] Lord Warburton was not
a loose thinker
100.17 the tone in which he replied to her] the tone in which he replied
100.31 I have thought of nothing else] I’ve done nothing else
100.32 I am a very judicious fellow] I’m a very judicious animal
100.36 eyes that shone with the light of a passion] eyes charged with the light
of a passion
101.1 which burned] that burned
101.17 “I like you very much, Lord Warburton,” the girl answered] “I like you
very much, Lord Warburton,” she answered
101.26 “Completely,” Isabel declared; and it was the truth.] “Completely,”
Isabel declared. She quite glowed there, inwardly, with the pleasure of feeling
she did.
102.2 something as nearly as possible as kind as what he had said to her]
something if possible not less kind than what he had said to her
102.3 she felt that he loved her.] she felt she did, all so mysteriously, matter to
him
102.6 “I thank you more than I can say for your offer,” she rejoined at last; “it
does me great honour.” ¶“Ah, don’t say that!” Lord Warburton broke out.] “I
thank you more than I can say for your offer,” she returned at last. “It does me
great honour.” ¶“Ah, don’t say that!” he broke out.
102.10 a man whom you know so little, coming down on you with such a
thumper!] a man you know so little coming down to you with such a thumper!
102.16 the play of high spirits—the coquetry of elation] the play of high
spirits, the exuberance of elation
102.26 “I am willing to risk it, Miss Archer,” her companion answered.] “I’m
willing to risk it, Miss Archer,” her companion replied.
102.31 my dearest happiness depends upon your answer] my dearest happiness
 depends on your answer
103.2 “Ah, you must never doubt of that,” said Isabel.] “Ah, you must never
doubt that,” said Isabel.
103.6 “You needn’t bother about that; that’s my affair.] “You needn’t worry
about that. That’s my affair.
103.23 “Has he told you that?” she asked.] “Has he told you that?”
103.27 “He appears $...$ to live in England,” said Isabel, in a manner] “He
appears $...$ to live in England.” Isabel spoke in a manner
103.29 her uncle’s pictorial circumstances] her uncle’s outward felicity
103.31 he immediately exclaimed, warmly—] he immediately cried with
warmth:
104.2 You ought at least to try; I have got a fair intelligence.] You ought at
least to try. I’ve a fair intelligence.
104.6 These words were uttered with a tender eagerness which went to
Isabel’s heart, and she would have given her little finger] These words were
uttered with a breadth of candour that was like the embrace of strong arms—
that was like the fragrance straight in her face, and by his clean, breathing lips,
of she knew not what strange gardens, what charged airs. She would have given
her little finger
104.10 “Lord Warburton, it is impossible for a woman to do better in this
world than to commit herself to your loyalty.” But though she could conceive
the impulse, she could not let it operate; her imagination was charmed, but it
was not led captive.] “Lord Warburton, it’s impossible for me to do better in
this wonderful world, I think, than commit myself, very gratefully, to your
loyalty.” But though she was lost in admiration of her opportunity she man-
aged to move back into the deepest shade of it, even as some wild, caught
creature in a vast cage. The “splendid” security so offered her was not the
greatest she could conceive.
104.12 something which altogether deferred the need of answering] something
that deferred the need of really facing her crisis
104.14 “Certainly, certainly!” cried Lord Warburton.] “Certainly, certainly!”
her companion cried.
104.17 I promise you I will do it justice] I promise you to do it justice
104.19 remember that my happiness is in your hands] remember how abso-
lutely my happiness is in your hands
104.23 what you ask is impossible, without making you miserable] what you
ask is impossible—letting you know it without making you miserable
104.32 “If there are better women than you, then I prefer the bad ones; that’s
all I can say,” he went on, with the same gravity.] “If there are better women
than you I prefer the bad ones. That’s all I can say,” he went on with the same
earnestness.
104.36 “I will speak to you myself, very soon,” she said.] “I’ll speak to you
myself—very soon.
105.1 “At your convenience, yes,” he answered.] “At your convenience, yes,”
he replied.
105.5 his hunting-whip] his hunting-crop
105.6 that mind of yours] that remarkable mind of yours
105.10 “So am I, my lord!” she exclaimed.] “So am I, my lord!” she oddly
exclaimed.
105.11 all that he possessed] all he possessed
105.15 I will come and see you.] I’ll come and see you, you know.
105.16 with his eyes fixed] his eyes fixed
105.19 an ancient beech] an ancient oak
105.20 “There is one thing more,” said Lord Warburton.] “There’s one thing
more,” he went on.
105.23 it is perfectly sanitary] it’s perfectly safe and right
105.27 “I delight in a moat,” said Isabel.] “I adore a moat,” said Isabel.
105.29 to bend his head] to bend his handsome bared head
105.31 Then, shaking his hunting-whip with little quick strokes, he walked
rapidly away. He was evidently very nervous.] Then, still agitating, in his
mastered emotion, his implement of the chase, he walked rapidly away. He
was evidently much upset.
105.32 Isabel herself was nervous, but she was not affected] Isabel herself was
upset, but she had not been affected
105.34 for it appeared to her that there was no choice] it appeared to her there
had been no choice
105.36 the idea failed to correspond to any vision of happiness] the idea failed
to support any enlightened prejudice in favour of the free exploration of life
106.2 this duty was comparatively simple] that duty was comparatively
simple
106.4 a great opportunity.] a magnificent “chance.”
106.6 might contain elements that would displease her] might have discomforts, 
might contain oppressive, might contain narrowing elements, might
prove really but a stupefying anodyne
106.9 nineteen women out of twenty would accommodate themselves to it
with extreme zeal. Why then upon her also should it not impose itself?]
nineteen women out of twenty would have accommodated themselves to it
without a pang. Why then upon her also should it not irresistibly impose itself?
106.12 to be larger than this large occasion? If she would not do this,] to be
larger than these large, these fabulous occasions? If she wouldn’t do such a
thing as that
106.13 Poor Isabel found occasion to remind herself] Poor Isabel found
ground to remind herself
106.16 for the isolation] the isolation
106.17 If it were pride] If it had been pride
106.18 it was singularly misplaced] such a bêtise was singularly misplaced
106.19 to assure herself it was not] to assure herself it was the very softness,
and the fine intelligence, of sympathy
106.20 that was the point; something told her that she should not be satisfied,] that was 
the truth; something assured her there was a fallacy somewhere
in the glowing logic of the proposition—as he saw it—even though she
mightn’t put her very finest finger-point on it;
106.23 that she would consider his proposal,] she would consider his question,
106.25 keeping her word] keeping her vow
106.29 whether she were not a cold, hard girl; and when at last she got up and
rather quickly went back to the house, it was because, as she had said to Lord
Warburton, she was really frightened at herself.] if she were not a cold, hard,
priggish person, and, on her at last getting up and going rather quickly back to
the house, felt, as she had said to her friend, really frightened at herself.
CHAPTER13
107.3 what Lord Warburton had said to her] what had taken place
107.7 but it would have been disagreeable to her to confide this particular
matter to Ralph] but she would have had to do herself violence to air this
special secret to Ralph
107.13 finding her uncle alone] finding her host alone
107.18 Isabel approached her point very directly.] She approached her point
directly.
107.23 he added] he then enquired
107.30 seeming ungrateful] seeming both tasteless and ungrateful
108.8 Should you like to see it?” the old man asked, obligingly.] Should you
like to see his letter?” the old man obligingly asked.
108.21 I like Lord Warburton quite well enough,” said Isabel, with that
appearance] I like Lord Warburton quite well enough.” She fell into that
appearance
108.24 proof against either of these sensations] proof against either of these
impressions
108.27 one of the pleasantest letters I have received in some weeks] one of the
pleasantest I’ve received for some weeks
108.28 the part which was about himself] the part that was about himself
108.35 The girl was silent a moment.] She was silent a little.
109.6 I suppose there is room] I presume there’s room
109.14 This suggestion] That suggestion
109.14 to rest upon] to rest on
109.16 the fact of her uncle’s genial shrewdness being associated with her
dilemma seemed to prove to her that] the fact of this association of her uncle’s
mild acuteness with her dilemma seemed to prove that
109.19 Lord Warburton’s handsome offer] Lord Warburton’s beautiful
appeal, reaching
109.22 the conception, however unformulated] the conception, even
unformulated
109.24 however little she might have felt warranted in lending a receptive ear
to her English suitor,] however she might have resisted conquest at her English
suitor’s large quiet hands
109.25 complete possession of her] positive possession of her
109.26 she ultimately took refuge,] she sought refuge
109.29 to take from her the sense of freedom] to deprive her of the sense of
freedom
109.30 There was something too forcible, something oppressive and restric-
tive, in the manner in which he presented himself.] There was a disagreeably
strong push, a kind of hardness of presence, in his way of rising before her.
109.32 the image of his disapproval, and she had wondered] the image, by the
danger, of his disapproval and had wondered
109.32 in one equal degree] in equal degree
109.36 Caspar Goodwood gave her an impression of energy] Caspar
Goodwood expressed for her an energy—and she had already felt it as a
power—that was of his very nature. It was in no degree a matter of his
“advantages”—it was a matter of the spirit that sat in his clear-burning eyes
like some tireless watcher at a window.
110.1 at any rate there was something very strong about him;] he insisted,
ever, with his whole weight and force:
110.2 to reckon with it] to reckon with that
110.5 The idea of a diminished liberty was particularly disagreeable to Isabel
at present, because it seemed to her that she had just given a sort of personal
accent to her independence by making up her mind to refuse Lord
Warburton.] The idea of a diminished liberty was particularly disagreeable
to her at present, since she had just given a sort of personal accent to her
independence by looking so straight at Lord Warburton’s big bribe and yet
turning away from it.
110.12 at a time when] at an hour when
110.17 she could not now discuss difficult questions, because she was pre-
occupied with the idea of going to Europe with her aunt,] she couldn’t then
discuss difficult questions, dazzled as she was by the great immediate opening
of her aunt’s offer of “Europe,”
110.19 it was to obtain a better one that he followed her across the seas] it was
now to obtain a better one that he was following her across the sea
110.19 a kind of fate] a kind of grim fate
110.22 a right to demand a description less metaphysical] a right to a nearer
and a clearer view
110.23 of certain well-known cotton-mills] of well-known cotton-mills
110.26 Caspar now managed the establishment, with a judgment and a
brilliancy] Caspar at present managed the works, and with a judgement and
a temper
110.27 kept its prosperity] kept their prosperity
110.28 Harvard University] Harvard College
110.29 gained more renown] gained renown rather
110.32 a votary of culture. Later, he had become reconciled to culture, and
though he was still fond of sport, he was capable of showing an excellent
understanding of other matters. He had a remarkable aptitude for mechanics]
a gleaner of more dispersed knowledge. Later on he had learned that the finer
intelligence too could vault and pull and strain—might even, breaking the
record, treat itself to rare exploits. He had thus discovered in himself a sharp
eye for the mystery of mechanics
110.34 seen his name in the papers] seen it in the newspapers
111.6 He had great talent for business, for administration, and for making
people execute his purpose and carry out his views—for managing men, as the
phrase was; and to give its complete value to this faculty, he had an insatiable,
an almost fierce, ambition. It always struck people who knew him] There were
intricate, bristling things he rejoiced in; he liked to organise, to contend, to
administer; he could make people work his will, believe in him, march before
him and justify him. This was the art, as they said, of managing men—which
rested, in him, further, on a bold though brooding ambition. It struck those
who knew him well
111.14 he would not always content himself with that. He had once said to
Isabel that, if the United States were only not such a confoundedly peaceful
nation, he would find his proper place in the army. He keenly regretted that the
Civil War should have terminated just as he had grown old enough to wear
shoulder-straps, and was sure that if something of the same kind would only
occur again, he would make a display of striking military talent.] he would
somehow and somewhere write himself in bigger letters. But it was as if some-
thing large and confused, something dark and ugly, would have to call upon him:
he was not after all in harmony with mere smug peace and greed and gain, an
order of things of which the vital breath was ubiquitous advertisement.
111.20 he had the qualities of a famous captain, and she answered that, if it
would help him on, she shouldn’t object to a war—a speech which ranked
among the three or four most encouraging ones he had elicited from her, and
of which the value was not diminished by her subsequent regret at having said
anything so heartless, inasmuch as she never communicated this regret to
him.] he might have ridden, on a plunging steed, the whirlwind of a great
war—a war like the Civil strife that had overdarkened her conscious childhood
and his ripening youth.
111.21 his being potentially a commander of men] his being by character and
in fact a mover of men
111.22 his character and appearance] his nature and aspect
111.22 She cared nothing about his cotton-mill, and the] She cared nothing
for his cotton-mill—the
111.24 not an inch less a man than he was;] no ounce less of his manhood,
111.25 too square and grim,] too square and set
111.27 a want of easy adaptability to some of the occasions of life] a want of
easy consonance with the deeper rhythms of life
111.28 she regarded with disfavour] she viewed with reserve
111.31 the pattern, the cut, was in every case identical] the figure, the stuff, was
so drearily usual
111.33 a man of Mr. Goodwood’s importance] a person of his importance
111.34 objection if] objection only if
111.35 therefore she might criticise] therefore might criticise
111.36 his great ones] his great
112.2 his being too serious, for one could never be that, but of his seeming so]
his being too serious, or, rather, not of his being so, since one could never be,
but certainly of his seeming so
112.3 He showed his seriousness too simply, too artlessly] He showed his
appetites and designs too simply and artlessly
112.6 he was the strongest man she had ever known, and she believed that at
bottom he was the cleverest] he was of supremely strong, clean make—which
was so much: she saw the different fitted parts of him as she had seen, in
museums and portraits, the different fitted parts of armoured warriors—in
plates of steel handsomely inlaid with gold
112.7 It was very strange; she was far from understanding the contradictions
among her own impressions.] It was very strange: where, ever, was any tangible
link between her impression and her act?
112.9 why he was so unsatisfactory] why he left her so harshly critical
112.13 Such incongruities were not a help] The sense of her incoherence was
not a help
112.14 a while unanswered] a while unhonoured
112.17 to perceive that she did not approve of his coming to
Gardencourt] to perceive how little it charmed her that he should come
down to Gardencourt
112.20 Isabel had a personal shrinking from entertaining two lovers at once]
there was a kind of grossness in entertaining two such passionate pleaders
at once
112.21 She sent no answer] She made no reply
112.23 It ran as follows.] DELETION
112.24 A great deal of careful reflection] A great deal of earnest thought
112.26 I do not find myself able] I am not, I am really and truly not, able
112.28 the light of a husband, or to regard your home—your various homes—
in the light of my own] the light of a companion for life; or to think of your
home—your various homes—as the settled seat of my existence
112.34 It is with this feeling of respect that I remain very truly yours,] It is with
this very great regard that I remain sincerely yours,
113.3 a resolution which was accompanied by no hesitation] a resolve which
was accompanied by no demur
113.6 It may be confided to the reader] It may be admitted
113.8 indiscreet] apt to push an advantage
113.9 The movement was unreasonable, however; for he had measured the
limits of her discretion as little as he had explored its extent;] The alarm was
unreasoned, however; for he was clear about the area of her indiscretion as
little as advised of its vertical depth,
113.12 “When you look at me in a certain way,” he said,] “When you look at
me in a certain way
113.15 You have a look which I have never encountered] You’ve an address
that I’ve never encountered
113.17 trying to turn me into ridicule,] trying somehow to abash me
113.25 laugh at me for that, you are very welcome] laugh at me for it you’re
very welcome
113.28 just as I am; it is true they are only Americans!] just as I am. It’s true
they’re nice fresh free-born Americans!
113.31 willing that your amusement] willing your amusement
114.3 fixing on him a gaze which may perhaps have contained the quality that
caused his knees to knock together] fixing on him perhaps the very gaze that
unnerved him
114.5 Never in the world.] Ah, not that!
114.7 in love with another] in love with Another
114.8 the other!] the Other!
114.21 not the same as she was] not the same as she once so beautifully was
114.23 you know that she comes from there] you know she comes from there
114.35 She is taking different views,] She’s taking different views, a different
colour,
115.3 one of these Europeans] one of these fell Europeans
115.8 the typical European] the typical, the fell European
115.11 He’s a noble fellow,] He’s a thoroughly grand man
115.20 another young woman, whose attention] another young woman, a
young woman whose attention
115.27 a force that I can scarcely call anything less than inspiration] a force
that I can only speak of as inspiration
115.33 He returned this gaze a moment] He returned this challenge a moment
115.35 Mr. Caspar Goodwood, from Boston.] Mr. Caspar Goodwood—of
Boston.
116.6 Ralph gave a small laugh.] Ralph gave a mild ambiguous laugh.
116.7 to marry me the other day] to marry me the other day
116.20 to laugh at me,] to pour scorn on me
116.21 to laugh at you] to pour scorn on you
116.22 “You are laughing worse than ever;] You’re more satiric than ever,
117.9 to turn her back upon a real friend] to go back on a real friend
117.16 “Are you not a little too much in a hurry?” Ralph inquired.] “Aren’t
you perhaps a little too much in a hurry?” Ralph enquired.
117.23 Henrietta Stackpole gave a brilliant smile.] Henrietta gave a brilliant
smile.
117.25 Ralph appeared to admit] Ralph appeared to allow
117.26 he surrendered himself to meditation,] he surrendered to thought
117.27 “If I should invite Mr. Goodwood,” he said] “If I should invite
Mr. Goodwood,” he finally said
117.32 “It’s just as you please,” said Henrietta.] “It’s just as you please,”
Henrietta returned.
118.1 Of course I believe it,” Miss Stackpole answered, ingeniously. ¶“Well,”
said Ralph] Of course I believe it,” Miss Stackpole ingeniously said. ¶“Well,”
Ralph concluded
118.10 in spite of his suspecting that it would be rather more indiscreet to
keep his promise than it would be to break it] in spite of his suspecting it would
be rather more indiscreet to keep than to break his promise
118.15 He had heard of Mr. Caspar Goodwood by name] He had heard this
fresh formidable figure named
118.16 his mother mentioned to him] his mother had mentioned
118.18 the idea seemed deficient in reality, and Ralph took no pains] the idea
had seemed deficient in reality and he had taken no pains
118.19 which would suggest] which would involve
118.23 in the American style] in the most splendid of the American styles
118.24 theories about this young man] theories about this intervener
118.29 in this event would prove himself] in this event prove himself
119.9 it’s some deeper motive] it’s some subtler motive
119.10 I will write] I shall write
119.13 His refusal of Ralph’s overtures made this young man vaguely uncom-
fortable] His refusal of Ralph’s overtures was vaguely disconcerting
119.14 Ralph began] our friend began
119.20 whether she had written] if she had written
119.20 to confess that she had written] to confess she had written
119.21 Mr. Goodwood had not answered her.] Mr. Goodwood had not replied.
119.23 he is not at all impulsive] he’s not really at all impetuous
119.27 Whether it was to pursue her investigations, or whether it was in
compliance with still larger interests, is a point which remains somewhat
uncertain; at all events, she presently proposed] She presently proposed
119.29 “If I must tell the truth,” she said] “If I must tell the truth,” she observed
119.33 I happen to know,” replied Isabel,] I happen to know,” replied her friend,
119.34 every opportunity of examining him] every opportunity of turning
him inside out
120.2 scenery makes a thin letter] scenery doesn’t make a vital letter
120.4 time to get started] time to get in touch
120.6 the metropolis] the British capital
120.9 she had a great desire to see something of London, which had always
been the city of her imagination] she was curious of the thick detail of London,
which had always loomed large and rich to her
120.10 visions of æsthetic hours] visions of romantic hours
120.19 presently mentioned these bright intentions to Ralph, who $...$ did
not express the sympathy] presently unveiled the bright vision to Ralph, who
$...$ scarce expressed the sympathy
120.20 the Tavistock Hotel] the Duke’s Head
120.26 she can surely find her way about this simple little island] can at least
find her way about this minute island
CHAPTER14
121.1 to start for London immediately] to start immediately
121.3 she believed it to be her duty] she believed it her duty
121.5 no answer to her letter] no response to her letter
121.5 to say that he would come to lunch] to say he would come to luncheon
121.9 a discretion the more striking that she was so sure he really liked
her] a consideration the more studied that she was so sure he “really
liked” her
121.11 Isabel told her uncle that she had written to him, and let Mr. Touchett
know of Lord Warburton’s intention of coming] Isabel told her uncle she had
written to him, mentioning also his intention of coming
121.16 to cover the visitor’s temporary absence, in case Isabel should find it
needful to give Lord Warburton another hearing] to cover any conjoined
straying away in case Isabel should give their noble visitor another hearing
121.16 This personage] That personage
121.18 dictated by considerations] dictated by reflexions
121.21 no relish of the prospect] no relish for the prospect
121.21 so precipitately opened] so prematurely opened
121.23 symptoms of that admiration] symptoms of that preoccupation
121.25 he avoided meeting her eye] he avoided meeting her eyes
121.31 rested in a manner which seemed to denote a conflict between atten-
tion and alienation] rested in a manner suggesting a conflict between deep
alienation and yearning wonder
122.1 the one that Isabel had liked best] the one Isabel had liked best
122.4 her mild forehead and silver cross had a romantic meaning—that
she was a member of a High Church sisterhood, had taken some pictur-
esque vows] her mild forehead and silver cross referred to some weird
Anglican mystery—some delightful reinstitution perhaps of the quaint
office of the canoness
122.13 shocked at the young lady’s indifference to such an opportunity]
shocked at such a girl’s failure to rise
122.14 our heroine’s last impression] our heroine’s last position
122.15 a high sense of general fitness] a due consciousness of inequality
122.16 Whatever Isabel might have made of her opportunities,] Whatever
Isabel might have made of her opportunities, at all events,
122.22 looking vaguely about the table and laughing a little] looking a trifle
absently about the table
122.26 the robes and crowns have gone out of fashion] the robes and crowns
are gone out of fashion
122.30 “Oh, you know, it isn’t much, at the best,” Lord Warburton
answered.] “Oh, you know, it isn’t much, at the best,” her neighbour
allowed.
123.1 Henrietta was silent a moment] Henrietta was silent a little
123.9 the world has got beyond that] the world has got beyond them
123.19 I do think of giving up—the little there is left of it—] I do think of
giving it up, the little there is left of it,
123.20 “I should like to see you do it,” Henrietta exclaimed, rather grimly.] “I
should like to see you do it!” Henrietta exclaimed rather grimly.
123.23 they have got to say] they have to say
124.3 whatever you may do] whatever else you may do
124.14 This was his harmless revenge] Which was his harmless revenge
124.16 After lunch] After luncheon
124.20 staring at the paintings] staring at its contents
124.28 that you should admit what you do] that you should admit you do
124.29 Isabel interrupted, blushing a little] Isabel interrupted, turning
slightly pale
124.34 “I have a reason, Lord Warburton,” said the girl; and she said it in a
tone that made his heart contract.] “I have a reason, Lord Warburton.” She said
it in a tone that made his heart contract.
125.1 in the meantime] in the mean time
125.5 he apparently saw something in her eyes which gave him courage] he
apparently saw in her eyes something that gave him courage
125.15 Isabel raised her eyebrows, with a certain eagerness.] She raised her
eyebrows in surprise.
125.21 “I can’t object to your political opinions, Lord Warburton,” said the
girl, “because I don’t understand them.”] “I can’t object to your political
opinions, because I don’t understand them.”
125.22 “You don’t care what I think,” he cried] “You don’t care what I think!”
he cried
125.24 Isabel walked away,] Isabel walked
125.29 there was something young and flexible in her movement, which her
companion noticed. Isabel’s eyes, however, saw nothing] there was something
so young and free in her movement that her very pliancy seemed to mock at
him. Her eyes, however, saw nothing
125.34 the expression of her eyes was strange. ¶“That reason that I wouldn’t
tell you,” she said, “I will tell it you, after all. It is that I can’t escape my fate.”]
the expression of her eyes strange. “That reason that I wouldn’t tell you—I’ll
tell it you after all. It’s that I can’t escape my fate.”
125.36 “I should try to escape it if I should marry you.”] “I should try to
escape it if I were to marry you.”
126.6 Poor Lord Warburton stared, with an interrogative point in either eye.
¶“Do you call marrying me giving up?”] Poor Lord Warburton stared, an
interrogative point in either eye. “Do you call marrying me giving up?”
126.9 “Other chances?” Lord Warburton repeated, more and more puzzled.]
“Other chances for what?”
126.11 her colour rapidly coming back to her. And then she stooped down
with a deep frown] her colour quickly coming back to her. And then she
stopped, looking down with a deep frown
126.14 “I don’t think it is presumptuous in me to say that I think you will gain
more than you will lose,” Lord Warburton observed.] “I don’t think it
presumptuous in me to suggest that you’ll gain more than you’ll lose,” her
companion observed.
126.18 Lord Warburton exclaimed,] he exclaimed
126.22 Well, if you are bent on being miserable, I don’t see why you should
make me so. Whatever charms unhappiness may have for you] Well, if you’re
bent on being miserable I don’t see why you should make me so. Whatever
charms a life of misery may have for you
126.24 “I am not bent on being miserable,” said Isabel.] “I’m not bent on a life
of misery,” said Isabel.
127.9 Lord Warburton asked, impatiently] his lordship asked impatiently
127.15 and reminded him that she ought to return home in time for tea, as she
was expecting some company] reminded him she ought to return home in time
for tea, as she was expecting company to partake of it
127.17 he was preoccupied—with good reason. Miss Molyneux looked lady-
like and patient, and awaited his pleasure.] he was preoccupied, and with good
reason. Miss Molyneux—as if he had been Royalty—stood like a lady-in-
waiting.
127.28 as if she were afraid that Miss Stackpole would address her] as if she
were afraid Miss Stackpole would address her
127.30 “Oh yes, pictures are very indispensable,” said Ralph] “Ah yes,
pictures are very convenient,” said Ralph
127.33 “It rains so very often.”] “It has rained of late so very often.”
128.2 “I am afraid we have got some people to tea,” said Miss Molyneux] “I’m
afraid we have some people to tea,” said Miss Molyneux
128.9 Miss Stackpole rejoined] Miss Stackpole returned
129.1 Lord Warburton hesitated a moment.] Lord Warburton hesitated.
129.14 did not catch her allusion. ¶“Miss Archer has been warning you!” she
went on.] failed to catch her allusion. “Miss Archer has been warning you!” she
therefore went on.
129.18 “Oh, dear no,” said Lord Warburton, blushing] “Oh dear, no,” said
Lord Warburton brazenly
129.25 “Miss Stackpole takes notes,” Ralph explained, humorously.]
“Miss Stackpole takes notes,” Ralph soothingly explained.
129.31 as if you had got a bad telegram] as if you had got a bad cable
130.3 “Is it true that you are going to London?”] “Is it true you’re going to
London?”
130.15 after which,] After it,
130.17 In this apartment] in which apartment
130.18 the drawing-room] the saloon
130.19 “I may as well tell you,” said her aunt,] “I may as well tell you,” said
that lady,
130.21 Isabel hesitated an instant.] Isabel considered.
130.25 Mrs. Touchett inquired, dryly, but dispassionately] Mrs. Touchett
dispassionately asked
130.26 Again Isabel hesitated.] Again the girl hesitated
130.31 especially when you smile that way. One would think you had carried
off a prize!] especially when you give me that rather conceited look. One would
think you were awfully pleased with yourself and had carried off a prize!
CHAPTER15
131.3 Mrs. Touchett looked with little favour upon the plan] Mrs. Touchett
looked with little favour on the plan
131.5 to stay at a boarding-house] to stay at her favourite boarding-house
131.13 all the more reason] all the greater reason
131.21 I don’t mean that I am too good] I don’t mean I’m too good
131.24 her little spare voice] her smallest, sparest voice
131.28 I hope very much that I may have no more offers] I hope very much I
may have no more offers
131.28 They bother me fearfully.] They upset me completely.
131.31 not to criticise the affair] not to criticise
132.1 “I will do whatever Ralph says is right,” Isabel said.] “I’ll do whatever
Ralph says is right,” Isabel returned.
132.4 “His mother is much obliged to you!” cried this lady, with a laugh. ¶“It
seems to me she ought to be,” Isabel rejoined, smiling.] “His mother’s much
obliged to you!” this lady dryly laughed. ¶“It seems to me indeed she ought to
feel it!” Isabel irrepressibly answered.
132.8 who have lived] who had lived
132.11 Ralph accompanied the two young ladies] Ralph accompanied their
visitors
132.20 and not being dependent on the local cuisine] and being familiar with
deeper fears than that of a cold kitchen
132.20 of that of Pratt’s Hotel] of the resources of Pratt’s Hotel
132.25 As London does not wear in the month of September its most brilliant
face] As London wears in the month of September a face blank but for its
smears of prior service
132.27 Miss Stackpole’s high irritation] Miss Stackpole’s high derision
132.28 you mean that the aristocracy are absent] you mean the aristocracy are
absent
132.32 except three or four millions of people] but three or four millions of
people
133.2 the stale September days $...$ borrowed a charm from his circum-
stances] the stale September days $...$ had a charm wrapped in them as a
coloured gem might be wrapped in a dusty cloth
133.3 a day spent with his inquisitive countrywomen] a chain of hours with
his comparatively ardent friends
133.8 the boots of a solitary policeman] the boots of a lone constable
133.8 the empty room] the empty place
133.13 There was a ghostly presence in the room,] There was a ghostly
presence
133.16 Ralph’s imagination took a flight] his imagination took a flight
133.20 could only be for Ralph] could only be for him
133.23 Isabel was constantly interested and often excited] Isabel was full of
premises, conclusions, emotions
133.25 little theories] brave theories, as to historic cause and social effect,
133.33 Henrietta Stackpole proved to be an indefatigable sight-seer and a
more good-natured critic] Henrietta proved an indestructible sight-seer and a
more lenient judge
133.35 her vivid remembrance of many of the cities of her native land] her
vivid remembrance of the strong points of the American civic idea
133.36 its dingy peculiarities] its dingy dignities
134.18 the pleasure of button-holding a celebrity] the pleasure of button-
holing a celebrity
134.24 and none of those that one really wants] but none of those that would
help along
134.28 a depressing sense of falling below her own standard] a sad sense of
falling below her mission
134.29 The incident which had preceded Isabel’s departure] The incident that
had preceded Isabel’s departure
134.31 in the girl’s mind; she took no pleasure in recalling Lord Warburton’s
magnanimous disappointment] our young woman’s mind: when she felt again
in her face, as from a recurrent wave, the cold breath of her last suitor’s
surprise, she could only muffle her head till the air cleared
134.35 a distasteful one, and she felt no desire to take credit for her conduct.
Nevertheless, mingled with this absence of an intellectual relish of it,] as
graceless as some physical act in a strained attitude, and she felt no desire to
take credit for her conduct. Mixed with this imperfect pride, nevertheless,
135.1 throbbed into joyous excitement] throbbed into odd demonstrations
135.5 when they were pretty she kissed them. Ralph noticed such incidents; he
noticed everything that Isabel did] when they were pretty, kissed them. Ralph
noticed these quaint charities; he noticed everything she did
135.6 by way of amusing his companions] that his companions might pass
the time
135.8 to do honour to their visit] for their visit
135.9 another guest, also, to meet the ladies] another guest to meet them
135.10 and who got on uncommonly well with Miss Stackpole] and for whom
prompt commerce with Miss Stackpole appeared to have neither difficulty nor
dread
135.13 Mr. Bantling, a stout, fair, smiling man of forty, who was extraordinarily
well dressed, and whose contributions to the conversation were characterised by
vivacity rather than continuity] Mr. Bantling, a stout, sleek, smiling man of forty,
wonderfully dressed, universally informed and incoherently amused
135.18 and listened with candid interest to her remarks upon the inner life]
and, at a dozen turns of their talk, bounded responsive—as with a positive
passion for argument—to her remarks upon the inner life
135.19 “Oh, I see,” said Mr. Bantling;] “Oh, I see;
135.21 the doctors have forbid] the doctors have forbidden
135.25 he is dropsical as well, though he doesn’t look it. You may depend
upon it he has got a lot of water somewhere] he has organic disease so
developed that you may depend upon it he’ll go, some day soon, quite quickly
135.27 that sort of thing makes it awfully slow for people in the house; I
wonder they have them under such circumstances] that sort of thing makes a
dreadfully dull house; I wonder they have people when they can do so little
for them
135.36 the sort of people that help her] the sort of people who help her
136.12 at last changing his topic, with a natural eagerness to provide suitable
conversation for so remarkable a woman. He returned, however, ultimately to
the idea of Henrietta’s going to stay with Lady Pensil, in Bedfordshire. “I under-
stand what you want,” he repeated; “you want to see some genuine English sport.
The Touchetts are not English at all, you know; they live on a kind of foreign
system; they have got some awfully queer ideas.] changing his topic with an easy
turn of hand. Yet he none the less gracefully kept in sight of the idea, dazzling to
Henrietta, of her going to stay with Lady Pensil in Bedfordshire. “I understand
what you want; you want to see some genuine English sport. The Touchetts aren’t
English at all, you know; they have their own habits, their own language, their
own food—some odd religion even, I believe, of their own.
136.16 she is going to play the principal part.] she’s going to play the principal
part. Plain as she is she makes up awfully well—I will say for her.
136.22 his suggestiveness of allusion] his splendid range of suggestion
136.24 “I don’t know but I would go, if your sister should ask me,” she said.]
“I don’t know but I would go, if your sister should ask me.
137.3 Henrietta had a long interview with them] Henrietta had had a long
interview with them
137.5 their accumulated topics] their store
137.19 “There is not the slightest need of your walking alone,” said
Mr. Bantling, in an off-hand tone expressive of gallantry.] “There’s not the
slightest need of your walking alone,” Mr. Bantling gaily interposed.
137.22 “I simply meant that you would be late for dinner,” Ralph answered.
“Think of those poor ladies, in their impatience, waiting for you.”] “I simply
meant that you’d be late for dinner,” Ralph returned. “Those poor ladies may
easily believe that we refuse, at the last, to spare you.”
137.24 if you will trust to me] if you’ll trust me
137.25 till we met one] till we meet one
137.26 “I don’t see why I shouldn’t trust to him, do you?”] “I don’t see why I
shouldn’t trust him, do you?”
137.29 Isabel answered, smiling] Isabel obligingly answered
137.33 leaving Isabel and her cousin standing in the square] leaving the girl
and her cousin together in the square
138.3 were squeezing their necks between the rusty railings of the inclosure]
poked their faces between the rusty rails of the enclosure
138.10 I am very glad they are such good friends] I’m glad very they’re such
good friends
138.13 Isabel was silent a moment.] Isabel was briefly silent.
138.15 she rejoined at last.] DELETION
138.18 basis of matrimony] basis of union
138.20 a very simple fellow] a very simple organism
138.21 Henrietta is simpler still] Henrietta’s a simpler one still
138.26 There is no reason why we should not stay here] There’s no reason we
shouldn’t stay here
139.7 There was almost an emotion in doing so. ¶“Why won’t you let me dine
with you?” he asked, after a pause.]—which indeed there was already an emotion
in doing. “Why won’t you let me dine with you?” he demanded after a pause.
139.12 as Isabel made no rejoinder they sat some time in silence] as she made
no rejoinder they sat some time in a stillness
139.14 It seemed to him that she was preoccupied] It seemed to him she was
preoccupied
139.23 “You have a great many friends that I don’t know,” he said, laughing a
little awkwardly.] “You’ve a great many friends that I don’t know.
139.29 Isabel probably meant that she had received news] Isabel probably
meant she had received news
139.31 he went on] he resumed
139.31 I promised a while ago] I promised just now
139.33 in my undertaking to amuse] in one’s undertaking to amuse
140.13 “Ask what you will,” Isabel answered gently, “and I will try and
satisfy you.”] “Ask what you will,” Isabel replied gently, “and I’ll try to
satisfy you.”
140.14 Lord Warburton] Warburton
140.16 Isabel started a little] Isabel suppressed a start
140.23 he is such a fine fellow] he’s such an honest man
140.27 I rode over] I drove over
140.34 “Do you know how often he had seen me?] “Do you know how often
he had seen me?” she enquired.
141.3 to say that she thought it] to say she thought it
141.9 cried Isabel, with a laugh] cried Isabel with a slightly nervous laugh
141.14 without the hope of a reward,] without hope of reward
141.17 while Isabel listened to him] while she listened to him
141.18 What had you in your mind] What had you in mind
141.19 “What had I in my mind?”] “What had I in mind?”
141.23 No, that is not logic—and I knew that before.] No, that’s not logic—
and I knew that before. It’s really nothing, you know.
141.24 What was it you said to yourself?] What was it you said to yourself?
141.25 Isabel reflected a moment and then she answered this inquiry] Isabel
reflected a moment, then answered
141.29 Warburton is such a fine fellow; as a man I think he has hardly a fault.
And then, he is what they call here a swell.] Warburton’s such a thorough good
sort; as a man, I consider he has hardly a fault. And then he’s what they call
here no end of a swell.
141.33 Isabel watched her cousin while he spoke, as if to see how far he would
go.] Isabel watched her cousin as to see how far he would go.
142.1 “Do I think I am so good?”] “Do you think I’m so good?”
142.4 would have contented themselves with Warburton] would have man-
aged to do with Warburton
142.5 know he has been run after] know how he has been stalked
142.7 you told me of several faults that he has, one day when I spoke of him to
you] one day when we talked of him you mentioned odd things in him
142.8 Ralph looked grave.] Ralph smokingly considered.
142.17 looking gently but earnestly at her cousin. “You would have liked me
to marry Lord Warburton.”] looking at her cousin with rueful gentleness.
“You’d have liked me to make such a marriage.”
142.21 Isabel gave a rather conscious sigh.] She gave rather a conscious sigh.
142.25 given Lord Warburton his final answer] given Warburton his final
answer
142.28 Are you thinking of proposing to me?] Are you thinking of proposing
to me?
142.30 with golden eggs] with the material of my inimitable omelettes
142.31 a symbol] the symbol
142.32 the entertainment of seeing] the thrill of seeing
142.35 We shall contemplate the rest of your career.] We shall hang on the
rest of your career.
143.1 a very honourable and brilliant one] a very decent, in fact a very
brilliant one
143.6 some magnificent example] some grand example
143.9 if you look for magnificent examples of anything I shall disappoint you]
if you look for grand examples of anything from me I shall disappoint you
143.12 To this Isabel made no direct reply] To this she made no direct reply
143.13 which would bear consideration] that would bear consideration
143.16 But you are many-sided.] But you’re of course so many-sided.
143.18 Ralph broke out, with a laugh] her companion broke out
143.20 to prove it he went on—“You want to see life, as the young men say.”]
to prove it went on: “You want to see life—you’ll be hanged if you don’t, as the
young men say.”
143.26 “You want to see, but not to feel,” said Ralph.] “You want to see, but
not to feel,” Ralph remarked.
143.28 Isabel returned.] DELETION
143.30 until I have seen Europe] till I’ve seen Europe
143.31 You evidently expect that a crowned head] You evidently expect a
crowned head
143.34 Ralph sat still a moment, looking at her] Ralph only sat still and looked
at her
143.35 As he did not follow her, she stopped, and they remained a while
exchanging a gaze, full on either side,] As he remained there she stopped, and
they exchanged a gaze that was full on either side
144.1 “You have answered my question,” said Ralph at last.] “You’ve
answered my question,” he said at last.
144.6 Isabel’s silvery eyes shone for a moment in the darkness.] Her silvery
eyes shone a moment in the dusk.
144.18 it seemed that this quest would be fruitful] this quest might avail
144.24 “When people forget I am a sick man I am often annoyed,” he said.]
“When people forget I’m a poor creature I’m often incommoded,” he said.
CHAPTER16
145.1 Isabel had had no hidden motive in wishing her cousin] She had had no
hidden motive in wishing him
145.2 it simply seemed to her] it simply struck her
145.5 the American girl who ends by regarding perpetual assistance as a sort
of derogation to her sanity,] the American girl whom extravagance of aid
places in an attitude that she ends by finding “affected”
145.7 and since her arrival] which since her arrival
145.8 it had been but scantily gratified] had been but meagrely met
145.9 she had missed it] she had wittingly missed it
145.11 the love of solitude] the wish to be quite by herself
145.12 Ralph’s attendance] her cousin’s attendance
145.12 She was sitting, towards nine o’clock,] Seated toward nine o’clock
145.15 but succeeding] she succeeded
145.16 other words on the page than those that were printed there] other
words than those printed on the page
145.17 in the afternoon] that afternoon
145.19 which presently admitted him, bearing the card] which presently gave
way to his exhibition, even as a glorious trophy, of the card
145.20 This card, duly considered, offered to Isabel’s startled vision] When
this memento had offered to her fixed sight
145.22 She let the servant stand before her inquiringly for some instants,] she
let the man stand before her
145.23 he asked at last,] he asked
145.25 she glanced at the mirror] glanced at the mirror
145.27 with some emotion] not so much smoothing her hair as girding her
spirit
145.29 Caspar Goodwood came in and shook hands with her. He said
nothing till the servant had left the room again, then he said—¶] Caspar
Goodwood was accordingly the next moment shaking hands with her, but
saying nothing till the servant had left the room.
146.1 He spoke] he then asked
146.2 were usually pointed,] were habitually pointed
146.4 Isabel answered him by a question.] She answered by a ready question,
146.7 that you would probably be at home] you would probably be at
home
146.11 neither of them had seated themselves] neither had sat down
146.12 a certain air of defiance] an air of defiance
146.13 “Henrietta never told me that she was writing to you,” Isabel said at
last.] “Henrietta never told me she was writing to you,” she said at last.
146.19 In so large a place as London it seemed to me very possible.] In so big a
place as London it seemed very possible.
146.20 “Apparently it was disagreeable to you even to write to me,” said
Mr. Goodwood.] “It was apparently repugnant to you even to write to me,” her
visitor went on.
146.22 no answer to this] no reply
146.24 “Henrietta is not delicate!” she exclaimed with a certain bitterness.]
“Henrietta’s certainly not a model of all the delicacies!” she exclaimed with
bitterness.
146.26 “I suppose I am not delicate either. The fault is mine as much as
hers.”] “I suppose I’m not a model either—of those virtues or of any others.
The fault’s mine as much as hers.”
146.29 nevertheless she rejoined inconsequently—] but she took a dif-
ferent turn.
146.32 What you have done is very natural.” ¶“It is indeed!” cried Caspar
Goodwood] What you’ve done was inevitable, I suppose, for you.” ¶“It was
indeed!” cried Caspar Goodwood
147.1 And Isabel went back] She went back
147.3 little thought to the sort of chair he sat in] little thought to that sort of
furtherance
147.5 he said. “You might have] You might have
147.8 But my silence was deliberate; I thought it best.”] But my silence was an
intention,” Isabel said. “I thought it the best thing.”
147.9 while she said this] while she spoke
147.11 what he ought to say] what he ought
147.14 finding it agreeable to have an advantage] tasting any advantage
147.16 she was not a girl to flaunt her advantage in his face, she was woman
enough to enjoy] little desirous to flaunt it in his face she could enjoy
147.18 a certain air of triumph] an air of triumph
147.19 to hers] to her own
147.20 they wore an expression of ardent remonstrance] they seemed to
shine through the vizard of a helmet
147.24 the prohibition] any such rule as my own
147.24 I promised you] I warned you
147.26 that I hoped never to hear from you] I hoped never to hear from you
147.27 for ten years.] for ten years; twenty years.
147.31 Isabel looked away] She looked away
147.32 for she knew they were of a much less earnest cast] knowing them of
so much less earnest a cast
147.36 She hesitated, and then she broke out with even greater irrelevance,]
She dropped, but then she broke out.
148.2 to talk about losing] to talk of losing
148.5 I displease you] I disgust you
148.8 eyes upon it] eyes on it
148.11 “Yes, you displease me very much, and the worst is that it is needless.”
¶Isabel knew that his was not a soft nature, from which pin-pricks would draw
blood] “Yes, you don’t at all delight me, you don’t fit in, not in any way, just
now, and the worst is that your putting it to the proof in this manner is
quite unnecessary.” It wasn’t certainly as if his nature had been soft, so that
pin-pricks would draw blood from it
148.17 who would take everything] who would grasp at everything
148.20 large and firm] large and hard
148.21 to dress his wounds himself] to dress his wounds, so far as they
required it, himself
148.22 In measuring the effect of his suffering, one might always reflect that
he had a sound constitution.] She came back, even for her measure of possible
pangs and aches in him, to her old sense that he was naturally plated and
steeled, armed essentially for aggression.
148.25 a dangerous liberality about this; for Isabel felt that it was quite open to
him to say that he had not always displeased her] a dangerous liberality about
it; for she felt how open it was to him to make the point that he had not always
disgusted her
148.27 only try and banish me] try to banish me
148.28 for a few months] at all for a prescribed time,
148.33 in a manner that Isabel found irritating] in a manner she found
irritating
148.34 making an effort] making a calculated effort
149.1 “Because I am in love with you,” said Caspar Goodwood simply.] “An
effort calculated for what?” And then as she hung fire, “I’m capable of
nothing with regard to you,” he went on, “but just of being infernally in
love with you.
149.4 our young lady felt the force of it.] our young lady felt the force of it—
felt it thrown off, into the vast of truth and poetry, as practically a bait to her
imagination. But she promptly came round.
149.8 there is a great difference] there’s all the difference in the world
149.10 wondering whether a little cynicism might not be effective] with a
studied effect of eagerness
149.12 Mr. Goodwood asked, giving no sign of wincing] her friend asked with
no sign of wincing
149.14 “But what will be my reward?”] “And what will be my reward?”
149.18 If you make this sacrifice I shall admire you greatly.] If you make the
sacrifice you’ll have all my admiration.
149.20 I don’t care a straw for your admiration. Will you marry me? That is
the question.] I don’t care a cent for your admiration—not one straw, with
nothing to show for it. When will you marry me? That’s the only question.
149.21 Assuredly not, if I feel] Never—if you go on making me feel only
149.22 “Then I ask again, what I shall gain?”] “What do I gain then by not
trying to make you feel otherwise?”
149.24 gazed for a while] gazed a while
149.27 and Isabel could perceive that this dart at last had struck home.
To see a strong man in pain had something terrible for her, and she
immediately felt very sorry for her visitor.] she could see her sharpness
had at last penetrated. This immediately had a value—classic, romantic,
redeeming, what did she know?—for her; “the strong man in pain” was
one of the categories of the human appeal, little charm as he might exert
in the given case.
149.29 to be kind] to be thoroughly kind
149.30 to feel that people care for me,] to feel people care for me
149.35 But I don’t want to marry. I shall probably never marry. I have a
perfect right to feel that way, and it is no kindness to a woman to urge her—to
persuade her against her will.] But I really don’t want to marry, or to talk about
it at all now. I shall probably never do it—no, never. I’ve a perfect right to feel
that way, and it’s no kindness to a woman to press her so hard, to urge her
against her will.
150.3 in these circumstances, it is supposed, I believe, to be a sort of mockery]
in these situations, it passes, I believe, for a sort of mockery
150.7 a certain rosy, lovely eagerness] a rosy, lovely eagerness
150.8 to analyse what she had said] to analyse her words
150.9 he murmured at last] he brought out at last
150.10 “Only,” he added in a louder tone—] “Only,” he heavily said,
150.11 I will do no harm.] I shall do no harm.
150.13 “You will marry some one else,” said Caspar Goodwood. ¶“Do you
think that is a generous charge?”] “You’ll marry some one else, as sure as I sit
here,” Caspar Goodwood declared. ¶“Do you think that a generous charge?”
150.14 Plenty of men will ask you.] Plenty of men will try to make you.
150.16 I shall probably never do so] I almost certainly never shall
150.17 but I don’t believe it.] and I like your ‘almost certainly’! I put no faith
in what you say.
150.19 You appear to think I am attempting to deceive you;] Do you accuse
me of lying to shake you off?
150.21 no promise that you will not marry] no pledge of anything at all
150.22 cried Isabel, with a bitter laugh.] omitted
150.24 “You think you won’t, but you will,” her visitor went on, as if he were
preparing himself for the worst.] “You may perhaps even believe you’re safe—
from wishing to be. But you’re not,” the young man went on as if preparing
himself for the worst.
150.25 “Very well, I will then. Have it as you please.”] “Very well then. We’ll
put it that I’m not safe. Have it as you please.”
150.30 “No, I don’t; I shall try and console myself] “No—I don’t; I shall try to
console myself
150.31 very clever men] very dazzling men
150.32 if there were only one, it would be enough.] and if there were only one
it would be enough. The most dazzling of all will make straight for you.
150.32 no one who is not] no one who isn’t dazzling
150.33 “I don’t need the aid of a clever man to teach me how to live,” said
Isabel.] “If you mean by dazzling brilliantly clever,” Isabel said—”and I can’t
imagine what else you mean—I don’t need the aid of a clever man to teach me
how to live.
151.1 “To live alone, do you mean? I wish that when you have found that out,
you would teach me.” ¶Isabel glanced at him a moment] “Find out how to live
alone? I wish that, when you have, you’d teach me!” ¶She looked at him a
moment
151.3 Poor Caspar may be pardoned] He might be pardoned
151.7 to have the infernal note, and I cannot take upon myself to say that
Isabel uttered it in obedience to an impulse strictly celestial. It was a fact,
however, that it had always seemed to her that Caspar Goodwood, of all men,
ought to enjoy the whole devotion of some tender woman.] to sound the
infernal note, and it is not on record that her motive for discharging such a
shaft had been of the clearest. He oughtn’t to stride about lean and hungry,
however—she certainly felt that for him.
151.8 turning away] as he turned away
151.9 Her exclamation] Her accent
151.11 to put her suitor in the wrong] to place him where she had been
151.16 what they call a brilliant one] what they call—no doubt—a dazzling one
151.18 a proposal that many girls] a proposal many girls
151.19 Isabel had hesitated to tell this story] Isabel had not proposed to herself
to tell this story
151.23 Caspar gazed at her with great interest.] Caspar watched her with
intense interest.
151.26 Mr. Goodwood received this announcement in silence; then, at last,
he said—] Her visitor received this announcement at first in silence, but at
last said:
151.33 “And pray is not an Englishman a human being?” Isabel inquired.
¶“Oh, no; he’s superhuman.” ¶“You are angry,”] “And pray isn’t an
Englishman a human being?” Isabel asked. ¶“Oh, those people? They’re not
of my humanity, and I don’t care what becomes of them.” ¶“You’re very
angry,”
152.1 Isabel turned away] She turned away
152.5 with his eyes gloomily fixed upon our heroine] with eyes gloomily
attached
152.6 to withdraw] to go
152.8 She was far too dear to him to be easily forfeited, and he had sailed
across the Atlantic to extract some pledge from her.] She was too nursed a need
to be easily renounced, and he had crossed the sea all to wring from her some
scrap of a vow.
152.9 stood before him again] stood again before him
152.10 “You do me very little justice,” she said—] “You do me very little
justice—
152.16 If the knowledge that I love you] If the knowledge of what I feel for you
152.17 it must have had a good deal] calling it a ‘little’ is a poor account of it
152.19 Isabel shook her head impatiently, as if to carry off a blush. “I have
refused a noble gentleman.] Isabel shook her head as if to carry off a blunder.
“I’ve refused a most kind, noble gentleman.
152.27 Isabel reflected a little, and then she said—] Isabel reflected and then
answered:
152.29 it would be very inconsistent.] It would be too inconsistent.
152.30 debated within himself] considered
152.33 “From whom was your invitation?” Isabel asked, surprised.] She
betrayed surprise. “From whom was your invitation?”
153.5 “It certainly did not come from me. Henrietta certainly goes very far,”
Isabel added. ¶“Don’t be too hard on her—that touches me.”] “It certainly
never did from me. Henrietta really goes very far,” Isabel added. ¶“Don’t be too
hard on her—that touches me.”
153.6 that was very proper of you] you did quite right
153.7 Isabel gave a little shudder] she gave a little shudder
153.9 so awkward for Lord Warburton!] so awkward for Lord Warburton.
153.10 where are you going?” Caspar asked.] where do you go?” her compa-
nion asked.
153.11 “I shall go abroad with my aunt] “I go abroad with my aunt
153.18 “Don’t be an infant.”] “Don’t be an infant!”
153.23 The world strikes me as small.” ¶“It is too large for me!” Caspar
exclaimed, with a simplicity which our young lady might have found touching]
“The world—with all these places so arranged and so touching each other—
comes to strike one as rather small.” ¶“It’s a sight too big for me!” Caspar
exclaimed with a simplicity our young lady might have found touching
153.27 if I say that it’s just that] if I say it’s just that
153.29 If you were in the same place as I, I should feel as if you were watching
me, and I don’t like that.] If you were in the same place I should feel you were
watching me, and I don’t like that—
153.31 Isabel went on, with a slight recurrence of the grandeur that had
shown itself a moment before—] she went on with a slight recurrence of
grandeur,
153.32 whatever there was of grandeur] whatever there might be of the too
superior
154.2 there was nothing that displeased him in the sort of feeling it
expressed. This feeling not only did no violence to his way of looking at the
girl he wished to make his wife, but seemed a grace the more in so ardent a
spirit. To his mind she had always had wings, and this was but the flutter of
those stainless pinions. He was not afraid of having a wife with a certain
largeness of movement; he was a man of long steps himself.] there was nothing he
winced at in the large air of it. He had never supposed she hadn’t wings and
the need of beautiful free movements—he wasn’t, with his own long arms and
strides, afraid of any force in her.
154.5 “Who would wish less to curtail your liberty than I?” he asked.] “Who
would wish less to curtail your liberty than I?
154.15 I am poor; I am of a serious disposition, and not pretty.] I’m poor and
of a serious disposition; I’m not pretty.
154.27 something almost passionately positive] something passionately
positive
154.29 a shining candour in her eyes which helped him] a shining candour in
her eyes that helped him
155.4 “One would think you were going to commit a crime!”] “One would
think you were going to commit some atrocity!”
155.10 committing a crime] committing an atrocity
155.12 As Isabel took his hand,] As she took his hand
155.23 as if to help him to leave her, she added—] as if to help him to
leave her:
155.32 an immense unwillingness in his attitude—a deep remonstrance in his
eyes] an immense unwillingness in his attitude and a sore remonstrance in
his eyes
156.5 a moment longer] a little longer
156.5 she dropped on her knees] dropped on her knees
CHAPTER17
157.3 She was an excitable creature, and now she was much excited; but she
wished to resist her excitement, and the attitude of prayer] Vibration was easy
to her, was in fact too constant with her, and she found herself now humming
like a smitten harp. She only asked, however, to put on the cover, to case herself
again in brown holland, but she wished to resist her excitement, and the
attitude of devotion
157.7 She was extremely glad Caspar Goodwood was gone; there was some-
thing exhilarating in having got rid of him. As Isabel became conscious of this
feeling she bowed her head a little lower; the feeling was there] She intensely
rejoiced that Caspar Goodwood was gone; there was something in having thus
got rid of him that was like the payment, for a stamped receipt, of some debt
too long on her mind. As she felt the glad relief she bowed her head a little
lower; the sense was there
157.7 a part of her emotion;] part of the emotion,
157.10 and when she came back to the sitting-room she was still trembling a
little. Her agitation had two causes;] and even when she came back to the
sitting-room her tremor had not quite subsided. It had had, verily, two causes:
157.16 she often expressed her gladness in accidents] she often uttered her
response to accidents
157.18 and gave herself up to the satisfaction] and yielded to the satisfaction
157.18 within a fortnight] in a fortnight
157.21 But it seemed to her that she had done something] But it appeared to
her she had done something
157.24 she had done what she preferred. In the midst of this agreeable
sensation the image of Mr. Goodwood] she had done what was truest to her
plan. In the glow of this consciousness the image of Mr. Goodwood
157.27 she rose quickly with an apprehension] she rose with an apprehension
157.29 something had happened to Isabel] our young lady had been
“through” something
157.31 Henrietta went straight] She went straight
158.2 her being glad that he had come] her being in a manner glad he had come
158.3 remembered that Henrietta had had no right] remembered Henrietta
had had no right
158.4 Miss Stackpole inquired, softly] the latter yearningly asked
158.6 “You acted very wrongly,” she said at last.] “You acted very wrongly,”
she declared at last.
158.7 I acted for the best, dear.] I acted for the best.
158.12 ¶“Isabel Archer,” she declared,] “Isabel Archer,” she observed
158.22 said Isabel, with a laugh] said Isabel without alarm
158.29 Henrietta broke out in dismay] Henrietta almost shrieked
158.32 Miss Stackpole stood there with expanded eyes, and then she went to
the mirror] Miss Stackpole glittered for an instant with dismay and then passed
to the mirror
158.34 Isabel remarked, lightly, as she did so] Isabel went on
158.36 But Miss Stackpole was not to be diverted by frivolous propositions,
nor bribed by the offer of autobiographic opportunities.] But her companion
was not to be diverted by frivolous propositions.
159.3 Henrietta went on] Henrietta pursued
159.12 but even in the midst of her irritation she tried to think] yet she still
tried to think
159.14 to be so disagreeable to me] to be so aggressive
159.15 I love you, Isabel] I love you intensely, Isabel
159.16 Well, if you love me, let me alone] Well, if you love me intensely let me
as intensely alone
160.14 queen of American journalism] Queen of American Journalism
160.22 Isabel saw that he had something] Isabel saw he had something
160.23 He had received a telegram from his mother, telling him that his
father] He had received from his mother a telegram to the effect that his father
160.25 she begged Ralph would instantly return] she begged he would
instantly return
160.27 had nothing incongruous] was not open to criticism
160.35 “I will go with you!” Isabel exclaimed.] “I shall certainly go with you,”
Isabel returned.
161.1 if he is ill I should like to be near him.” ¶“I think you like him,” said
Ralph, with a certain shy pleasure in his eye.] if he’s ill I shall like to be near
him.” ¶“I think you’re fond of him,” said Ralph with a certain shy pleasure in
his face.
161.3 “I think I love him,” said Isabel, simply.] “I quite adore him,” Isabel
after a moment said.
161.5 Isabel welcomed this assurance, but she gave secretly a little sigh of
relief] She welcomed this assurance, but she gave secretly a small sigh of
relief
161.7 was not what she said] was not what she spoke
161.9 other reasons why she should not remain in London] other reasons for
her not remaining in London
161.11 “In Bedfordshire?” Ralph exclaimed, with surprise.] “In Bedfordshire?”
161.15 Suddenly, however, he looked grave again.] Suddenly, none the less,
his gravity returned.
161.25 the tears suddenly rushed into her eyes] the tears suddenly rose to
her eyes
161.28 she had just risen from the lunch-table] she had just risen from her
luncheon
161.31 excuse my alluding to it] pardon my alluding to it
162.11 take her out in the afternoon] take her out that afternoon
162.19 I am not satisfied about Isabel] I’m not at peace about Isabel
162.28 a novel sensation] a new pang
162.32 Ralph made Miss Stackpole a diplomatic answer] Ralph gave
Miss Stackpole a diplomatic answer
162.34 that would satisfy you perfectly] this would satisfy you perfectly
163.2 I just sent him a word—a word to the wise.] I sent him a word—the
word we just utter to the ‘wise.’
163.6 Isabel was cruel?” Ralph inquired, smiling, and relieved at learning that
his cousin had not deceived him.] Isabel was cruel?”—and Ralph’s face lighted
with the relief of his cousin’s not having shown duplicity.
163.9 “Poor Mr. Goodwood!” Ralph exclaimed.] “Poor Mr. Goodwood!”
Ralph sighed.
163.12 Poor Mr. Goodwood!” repeated Ralph. The exclamation $...$ was
somewhat mechanical. It failed exactly to express his thoughts] Poor
Mr. Goodwood!” Ralph repeated. The exclamation $...$ was automatic; it
failed exactly to express his thoughts
163.19 If I didn’t believe Isabel would come round,” said Miss Stackpole—“well,
I’d give her up myself!”] If I didn’t believe Isabel would come round,” Miss
Stackpole added—“well, I’d give up myself. I mean I’d give her up!”
CHAPTER18
164.2 that under the circumstances Isabel’s parting with Miss Stackpole] that,
in the conditions, Isabel’s parting with her friend
164.5 in her eye] in her eyes
164.13 what his mother wanted was simply opportunity. The finest natures
were those that shone on large occasions] what his mother wanted was just
easy occasion. The finer natures were those that shone at the larger times
164.21 to send an inquiry to her room, when her attention was taken by an
unexpected sound] to send a question to her room, when this purpose quickly
yielded to an unexpected sound
164.23 from the drawing-room. She knew that her aunt never touched the
piano] from the saloon. She knew her aunt never touched the piano
164.27 so that Isabel took her way to the drawing-room with much alertness]
so that the girl took her way, almost with restored cheer, toward the source of
the harmony
164.29 door at which Isabel entered] door at which she entered
165.1 although her back was presented to the door] her back was presented to
the door
165.2 Isabel contemplated for some moments in surprise] Isabel viewed for
some moments with surprise
165.6 that the British domestic is not effusive] with what treasures of reserve
the function of receiving orders may be accompanied
165.11 her aunt’s maid, whose offered assistance the young lady from
Albany—versed, as young ladies are in Albany, in the very metaphysics of
the toilet—had perhaps made too light of. The arrival of a visitor was far from
disagreeable to Isabel;] her aunt’s maid, through whose hands she had slipped
perhaps a little too mistrustfully and with an effect of plumage but the more
lustrous. The advent of a guest was in itself far from disconcerting;
165.11 a youthful impression] a young faith
165.12 influence upon her life] influence on her life
165.15 something of Beethoven’s] something of Schubert’s
165.15 but she recognised Beethoven] but recognised Schubert
165.17 she touched the piano softly and discreetly, but with evident skill. Her
touch was that of an artist;] she touched the piano with a discretion of her own.
It showed skill, it showed feeling;
165.20 the lady at the piano] the stranger
165.21 as if she had become aware of her presence] as if but just aware of her
presence
165.30 the stranger more interesting] the visitor more interesting
165.34 The lady gave a discriminating smile.] The lady smiled and
discriminated.
165.35 even Beethoven] even Schubert
165.36 they are our worst moments] they are our worst
166.1 “I am not in that state now,”] “I’m not in that state now then,”
166.3 “If it will give you pleasure—most willingly.”] “If it will give you
pleasure—delighted.”
166.5 the stranger stopped] the new-comer stopped
166.8 looking over her shoulder at the girl. She was forty years old, and she
was not pretty; but she had a delightful expression. “Excuse me,” she said]
looking over her shoulder. She was forty years old and not pretty, though her
expression charmed. “Pardon me,” she said
166.9 “I am my aunt’s niece,” said Isabel, with naïveté.] “I’m my aunt’s
niece,” Isabel replied with simplicity.
166.12 looking over her shoulder with her charming smile. ¶“That’s very
well,” she said, “we are compatriots.”] casting her air of interest over her
shoulder. “That’s very well; we’re compatriots.”
166.15 the opposite supposition had made her interesting,] the opposite
supposition had made her romantic
166.16 this revelation would have diminished her effectiveness] this revela-
tion would have marked a drop
166.19 for Isabel, as she listened to the music, found much stimulus to
conjecture in the fact that an American should so strongly resemble a foreign
woman] rarer even than to be French seemed it to be American on such
interesting terms
166.20 Her companion played] The lady played
166.25 the lady got up, and, coming to her auditor, smiling,] her companion
got up and, coming nearer with a smile,
166.30 but she nevertheless said, with a certain abruptness, in answer to this
speech] but nevertheless spoke with a certain abruptness in reply to this speech
166.36 that must have bored you] that must rather have bored you
167.6 Of the appearance of this repast] On the appearance of this repast
167.12 to say that he was better] to say he was better
167.14 she said] she pursued
167.27 it represented but little] it represented little
167.28 Madame Merle had a charming manner] Madame Merle had as
charming a manner as any she had ever encountered
167.31 “It is hardly worth while I should tell you, then.”] “It’s hardly worth
while then I should tell you.”
167.34 Madame Merle glanced at Isabel with a fine, frank smile.] Madame
Merle glanced at Isabel with a sort of world-wide smile, a thing that over-
reached frontiers.
168.12 It was a face that told of a rich nature and of quick and liberal
impulses, and $...$ was in the highest degree agreeable to contemplate.] It
was a face that told of an amplitude of nature and of quick and free motions
and $...$ was in the highest degree engaging and attaching.
168.13 plump woman] smooth woman
168.15 those accumulations which minister to indolence] those accumula-
tions which suggest heaviness
168.16 but there was a graceful harmony among them] but in perfect propor-
tion and harmony
168.18 She had a small grey eye, with a great deal of light in it—an eye
incapable of dulness, and, according to some people, incapable of tears; and
a wide, firm mouth,] Her grey eyes were small but full of light and incapable of
stupidity—incapable, according to some people, even of tears; she had a liberal,
full-rimmed mouth
168.24 Madame Merle had thick, fair hair, which was arranged with pictur-
esque simplicity, and a large white hand, of a perfect shape—a shape so perfect
that its owner, preferring to leave it unadorned, wore no rings.] Madame Merle
had thick, fair hair, arranged somehow “classically” and as if she were a Bust,
Isabel judged—a Juno or a Niobe; and large white hands, of a perfect shape, a
shape so perfect that their possessor, preferring to leave them unadorned, wore
no jewelled rings.
168.27 observation led her to say to herself that Madame Merle might be a
German—a German of rank,] observation might have ranked her as a
German—a German of high degree, perhaps an Austrian, a baroness,
168.29 Isabel would never have supposed that she had been born in
Brooklyn—though she could doubtless not have justified her assumption
that the air of distinction, possessed by Madame Merle] It would never have
been supposed she had come into the world in Brooklyn—though one could
doubtless not have carried through any argument that the air of distinction
marking her
168.32 over the spot of the lady’s nativity] over her cradle
168.34 attitude which she then and there took towards life. And yet Madame
Merle had evidently nothing] attitude she there took towards life. And yet she
had evidently nothing
168.35 her deportment expressed] her manner expressed
169.2 a woman of ardent impulses] a woman of strong impulses
169.5 What an ideal combination! thought Isabel. ¶She made these reflec-
tions while the three ladies sat at their tea; but this ceremony] This com-
mended itself to Isabel as an ideal combination. ¶The girl made these reflexions
while the three ladies sat at their tea, but that ceremony
169.7 to confer with him in private] for a private talk
169.10 Isabel’s perception of the melancholy that now hung over
Gardencourt] Isabel’s sense of the sadness now settling on Gardencourt
169.14 less sombre than Ralph’s had been] less depressed than his own
had been
169.18 Sir Matthew came in; Madame Merle was the last to appear.] Sir
Matthew appeared; Madame Merle was the last.
169.21 “Pray who is Madame Merle?”] “Pray who is this Madame Merle?”
169.24 “I was sure you would think her pleasant,” said Ralph.] “I was sure
you’d think her very pleasant.”
169.31 Madame Merle is a woman] She’s a woman
170.6 M. Merle was then living] Monsieur Merle was then living
170.13 What was M. Merle] What was Monsieur Merle
170.32 and on this occasion took a less encouraging view] and now took a less
encouraging view
170.34 end was at hand] end must be at hand
170.35 The local doctor, who was a very sagacious man, and in whom] The
local doctor, a very sagacious man, in whom
171.1 Sir Matthew Hope returned several times to Gardencourt] Sir Matthew
Hope came back several times
171.4 several times] at hours
171.10 relapsed into unconsciousness] relapsed into stupor
171.11 Ralph was with him alone] Ralph only was with him
171.18 if you don’t say so] if you don’t say it
171.26 was alone with him] was alone in charge
171.29 projected upon the wall and ceiling,] projected over wall and ceiling
172.1 “Won’t it tire you?” Ralph inquired.] “Won’t it tire you?” Ralph
demurred.
172.3 I want to talk about you.] I want to talk about you.
172.5 “You had better select a brighter topic,” he said.] “You had better select
a brighter topic.”
172.7 that you would do something] you’d do something
172.15 you have got your mother] you have your mother
172.17 Ralph answered] Ralph returned
172.21 that’s no reason—”] but that’s no reason—!”
172.22 but not exactly querulous sigh] but not quite querulous sigh
173.6 She does it to please herself.] She does it because it suits her.
173.23 by no means novel] by no means fresh
173.24 way of expressing the optimistic view of his son’s health] way of taking
the cheerful view of his son’s possible duration
173.26 Ralph had usually treated it humorously; but present circumstances
made the humorous tone impossible.] Ralph had usually treated it facetiously;
but present circumstances proscribed the facetious.
173.27 gaze in silence] gaze
173.30 what a life might you not have] what a life mightn’t you have
173.32 his father asked softly—] his father resumed softly:
173.34 with a rather fixed smile] with a strained smile
173.36 Don’t you like her?] Don’t you like Isabel?
174.4 “I know she likes you. She told me so.”] “I know she likes you. She has
told me how much she likes you.”
174.18 to it in such an hour as this] to it at such an hour as this
174.20 she refused Lord Warburton] she refused Warburton
174.21 that proves that there is a chance] that proves there’s a chance
174.24 Mr. Touchett asked, eagerly] Mr. Touchett eagerly asked
174.27 Well, I am sorry for him.] Well, I’m sorry for him, whoever he was.
174.32 pulmonary weakness] pulmonary disorder
174.35 The old man raised his feeble hand and moved it to and fro a little
before his face] The old man raised his weak hand and moved it to and fro
before his face
175.1 a cousin that you have never seen] a cousin that you had never seen
175.3 It is just the same with your weak lungs.] It’s just the same with your
bad lung.
175.8 think it was wrong] think it wrong
175.15 You say you have got so many interests] You say you’ve so many interests
176.4 to gratify their imagination] to meet the requirements of their
imagination
176.9 give it to Isabel] make it over to Isabel
176.10 give the second half to her] give her the second
176.19 she will never have to marry for a support. She wishes to be free, and
your bequest will make her free.] she’ll never have to marry for a support.
That’s what I want cannily to prevent. She wishes to be free, and your bequest
will make her free.
176.23 Ralph started a little] Ralph openly stared
176.25 Do you want me to have the credit of it?] Do you want me to have the
credit of it?
177.1 I give you notice that I shall be very sharp with you.” ¶The humour of
this appeared to touch his father; he lay a little while] I give you notice that I
shall be very sharp, quite horrid and strange, with you.” ¶The humour of this
appeared to touch his father, who lay a little while
177.3 he said at last] Mr. Touchett said at last
177.7 for your entertainment] for your mere amusement
177.13 You say that Isabel wants to be free] You say Isabel wants to be free
177.17 she has ever had before; her father gave her everything] she has ever
had before. Her father then gave her everything
177.33 No, at first] No—though at first
177.35 remember that she had still a lifetime] remember she has still a
lifetime
178.1 “Well, you have worked it out,” said the old man, with a sigh.] “Well,
you have worked it out,” said the old man helplessly.
178.4 the old man answered] Mr. Touchett answered
178.14 Isabel is a sweet young girl; but do you think she is as good as that?]
Isabel’s a sweet young thing; but do you think she’s so good as that?
178.15 “She is as good as her best opportunities,” said Ralph.] “She’s as good
as her best opportunities,” Ralph returned
178.22 his son asked, caressingly] his son caressingly asked
178.25 Mr. Touchett lay silent a long time. Ralph supposed that he had given
up the attempt to understand it. But at last he began again] Mr. Touchett lay a
long time still. Ralph supposed he had given up the attempt to follow. But at
last, quite lucidly, he began again
178.34 Well, you have gone into it!” he exclaimed.] Well, you have gone into
it!” he repeated.
179.4 he was aware that their conversation had been prolonged to a danger-
ous point. “I shall get just the good that I said just now I wished to put into
Isabel’s reach—that of having gratified my imagination.] he was aware their
talk had been unduly prolonged. “I shall get just the good I said a few moments
ago I wished to put into Isabel’s reach—that of having met the requirements of
my imagination.
CHAPTER19
180.2 and if they had not] so that if they had not
180.7 although she would have hesitated] though she would have
hesitated
180.9 her new friend in the sense which she privately attached to this term]
her new friend in the high sense she privately attached to this term
180.10 whether she ever had been] if she ever had been
180.13 She had an ideal of friendship $...$ and it did not seem to her in this
case $...$ that the actual completely expressed it.] She had an ideal of friend-
ship $...$ which it failed to seem to her in this case $...$ that the actual
completely expressed.
180.14 one’s ideal could not become concrete] one’s ideal could never
become concrete
180.18 a more agreeable and interesting woman] a more agreeable and
interesting figure
180.19 a woman who had less of that fault] a person having less of that fault
180.21 the more tiresome parts of one’s own personality] the more tiresome,
the stale, the too-familiar parts of one’s own character
180.22 to Madame Merle] to this amiable auditress
180.27 but that was all the greater reason why they should be carefully
guarded] but there was all the greater reason for their being carefully guarded
180.27 the girl always said to herself] she always remembered
180.31 she was a charming, sympathetic, intelligent, cultivated woman] she
was charming, sympathetic, intelligent, cultivated
181.2 without meeting several persons of her own sex,] without meeting in
her own sex several persons
181.3 she was rare, she was superior, she was pre-eminent] she was rare,
superior and preëminent
181.3 There are a great many amiable people] There are many amiable people
181.10 part of the satisfaction that Isabel found in her society] part of the
satisfaction to be taken in her society
181.12 her companion understood her] this lady understood her
181.13 the fountain of sentiment] the fount of passion
181.15 Her pleasure was now to judge rather than to feel] She proposed
moreover, as well as expected, to cease feeling
181.17 she had been rather foolish, and now she pretended to be wise] she had
been a little mad, and now she pretended to be perfectly sane
181.19 it seems to me that I have earned the right] it seems to me one has
earned the right
181.20 in addition too ignorant] in addition much too ignorant
181.22 after forty one can’t really feel] after forty one can’t really feel
181.31 How could the lightest word do less, of a person who was prepared to
say] How could the lightest word do less on the part of a person who was
prepared to say
181.33 Upon many of her interlocutors,] On many of her interlocutors
181.34 it was so difficult to surprise her] it was disconcertingly difficult to
surprise her
181.35 this motive] this impulse
182.2 like grave confessions] like cold confessions
182.3 had settled down upon Gardencourt] had settled upon Gardencourt
182.5 But Isabel] But our young woman
182.9 Madame Merle was very appreciative; she liked almost everything]
Madame Merle liked almost everything
182.16 to inhale the clear, fine odour of the wool] inhaling the clear, fine scent
of the wool
182.20 with a countenance] from a countenance
182.25 Before lunch Madame Merle was always engaged] Before luncheon,
always, Madame Merle was engaged
182.26 Isabel admired the inveteracy with which she occupied herself] Isabel
admired and envied her rigid possession of her morning
182.29 but she envied the talents, the accomplishments, the aptitudes, of
Madame Merle] but she wandered, as by the wrong side of the wall of a private
garden, round the enclosed talents, accomplishments, aptitudes of Madame
Merle
182.30 and in this and other ways Madame Merle] and in twenty such ways
this lady
182.31 “I should like to be like that!” Isabel secretly exclaimed] “I should like
awfully to be so!” Isabel secretly exclaimed
182.32 as one of her friend’s numerous facets suddenly caught the light] as
one after another of her friend’s fine aspects caught the light
182.33 this exemplary woman] a high authority
182.34 no very long time, indeed, for Isabel to feel that she was] no great time
indeed for her to feel herself
182.35 she asked herself] she wondered
183.2 That I think I shall always do.] That, no doubt, I shall always do.
183.3 it is my fault that I am not pliable enough.] isn’t it my fault that I’m not
pliable enough?
183.5 tempted to reproduce in her deportment some of the most graceful
features of that of her friend,] sometimes moved to gape at her friend aspir-
ingly and despairingly
183.6 to shine herself] herself to shine
183.8 but she admired her even more than she liked her] but was even more
dazzled than attracted
183.8 She sometimes wondered] She sometimes asked herself
183.10 this brilliant fugitive from Brooklyn;] this perverted product of their
common soil,
183.10 Henrietta would not approve of it] it would be severely judged
183.12 Henrietta would not like Madame Merle; for reasons that she could
not have defined, this truth came home to Isabel.] Henrietta would not at all
subscribe to Madame Merle; for reasons she could not have defined this truth
came home to the girl.
183.14 her new friend would accommodate herself perfectly to her old] her
new friend would strike off some happy view of her old
183.20 find the key to Henrietta’s virtues. “That is the great thing,” Isabel
reflected] find the key to Henrietta’s value. “That’s the great thing,” Isabel
solemnly pondered
183.22 she added that this] she added that such
183.25 I cannot enumerate all the links] I may not count over all the links
183.30 to be guilty of any fatuous illusions on the subject] to nourish fatuous
illusions on the article
183.31 She had known a good many of the fortunate few,] She had encoun-
tered many of the fortunate few
183.33 by her own measure she was nothing of a personage] by her informed
measure she was no figure for a high scene
183.35 To be so graceful, so gracious, so wise, so good, and to make so light of
it all] To be so cultivated and civilised, so wise and so easy, and still make so
light of it
183.36 when one looked so much like one] when one so carried and presented
one’s self
184.4 If Madame Merle, however, made light of her advantages as regards
the world, it was not because she had not, for her own entertainment, taken
them, as I have intimated, as seriously as possible. Her natural talents, for
instance; these she had zealously cultivated.] It was as if somehow she had all
society under contribution, and all the arts and graces it practised—or was the
effect rather that of charming uses found for her, even from a distance, subtle
service rendered by her to a clamorous world wherever she might be?
184.5 she wrote a succession of letters] she wrote a succession of letters, as
those arriving for her appeared innumerable
184.8 Madame Merle’s contribution to the mail. She knew a multitude of
people, and, as she told Isabel, something was always turning up to be written
about.] Madame Merle’s offering to the mail. She knew more people, as she
told Isabel, than she knew what to do with, and something was always turning
up to be written about.
184.9 taking a sketch] brushing in a sketch
184.12 a brilliant musician] a brave musician
184.15 losing the entertainment of her talk] losing the grace of her talk
184.16 since she had known Madame Merle] since she had known her
184.16 her own playing] her own facility
184.17 meagre and artless] basely inferior
184.18 she had been thought to play very well] she had been thought rather a
prodigy at home
184.22 morsels of picturesque embroidery] tasks of rich embroidery
184.24 a sort of work in which her bold, free invention was as remarkable as
the agility of her needle] an art in which her bold, free invention was as noted
as the agility of her needle
184.25 for when she was engaged] for when engaged
184.26 to read everything important] to read “everything important”
184.29 she always had the social quality; she never was preoccupied, she
never pressed too hard] she had always the social quality, was never rudely
absent and yet never too seated
184.31 and she appeared to attach no importance to anything] and appeared
to impute scant worth to anything
184.34 a most comfortable, profitable, agreeable person] the most comfort-
able, profitable, amenable person
184.36 not that she was affected or pretentious; for from these vulgar
vices] not that she was either affected or pretentious, since from these
vulgar vices
185.3 her angles too much smoothed. She had become too flexible, too supple;
she was too finished, too civilised] her angles too much rubbed away. She had
become too flexible, too useful, was too ripe and too final
185.9 to think of Madame Merle as an isolated figure;] to think of her in any
detachment or privacy,
185.9 in her relations with her fellow-mortals] in her relations, direct or
indirect, with her fellow mortals
185.10 Isabel often wondered what her relations might be with her own soul.]
One might wonder what commerce she could possibly hold with her own
spirit.
185.11 She always ended] One always ended
185.12 having a charming surface does not necessarily prove that one is
superficial] a charming surface doesn’t necessarily prove one superficial
185.13 in her youth, she had only just sufficiently escaped being nourished] in
one’s youth, one had but just escaped being nourished
185.15 a conventional language] a conventional tongue
185.20 Isabel once found occasion to say to her, in response to some allusion
that she had dropped] she once found occasion to say to her friend in response
to some allusion that had appeared to reach far
185.22 with a picturesque smile. “I hope I have not the pose of a martyr.”]
with the amused smile of a person seated at a game of guesses. “I hope I haven’t
too much the droop of the misunderstood.”
185.27 “What a wonderful thing!”] “Such a wonderful thing!”
185.29 “A great many people give me the impression of never having felt
anything very much,” Isabel answered.] But Isabel rose to the irony. “A great
many people give me the impression of never having for a moment felt
anything.”
185.31 there are more iron pots, I think, than porcelain ones. But you may
depend upon it that every one has something;] there are many more iron pots
certainly than porcelain. But you may depend on it that every one bears some
mark;
185.33 I am rather stout porcelain;] I’m rather stout,
185.34 I have been chipped and cracked!] I’ve been shockingly chipped and
cracked.
186.5 some day she would relate her history] she would some day a tale unfold
186.6 Isabel assured her that she should delight to listen to it] Isabel assured
her she should delight to listen to one
186.7 appeared to desire a postponement] begged repeatedly for a respite
186.8 the young girl that she must wait] her young companion that they
must wait
186.9 This would certainly happen; a long friendship lay before them.] This
would be sure to happen; a long friendship so visibly lay before them.
186.11 asked Madame Merle if she could not trust her—if she feared a betrayal
of confidence] enquired if she mightn’t be trusted—if she appeared capable of a
betrayal of confidence
186.13 the elder lady answered] her fellow visitor answered
186.15 to talk to Isabel about Isabel] to talk to Isabel of Isabel
186.17 our heroine’s history, her sentiments, opinions, prospects] our
heroine’s history, sentiments, opinions, prospects
186.20 with inexhaustible sympathy and good nature. In all this there was
something flattering to the girl, who knew that Madame Merle knew a great
many distinguished people, and had lived,] with infinite good nature. This
flattered and quickened the girl, who was struck with all the distinguished
people her friend had known and with her having lived,
186.23 to gratify this sense] to gratify the sense
186.24 she often begged her friend to tell her about the people she knew] she
often appealed to these stores of reminiscence
186.26 “I don’t pretend to be learned,”] “I don’t pretend to be educated,”
186.28 she spoke $...$ of going to Wallachia] she spoke $...$ of proceeding to
Malta
186.29 she had often stayed] she had often dwelt
186.32 were the finest people in the world] were the most convenient in the
world to live with
186.33 her staying in the house] her remaining here
186.36 Mrs. Touchett remarked to Isabel. “She is incapable of doing anything
indiscreet; she is the best-bred woman I know] that gentleman’s wife remarked
to her niece. “She is incapable of a mistake; she’s the most tactful woman I
know
187.4 to stay] to put in this time
187.5 Serena Merle has no faults.] Serena Merle hasn’t a fault.
187.7 “If I didn’t $...$,” Isabel said.] “If I didn’t $...$,” Isabel returned.
187.8 She never does anything wrong.] She’s never the least little bit ‘off.’
187.9 Lily told me that she hoped] Lily told me she hoped
187.10 in securing Madame Merle] in putting you in relation with Madame
Merle
187.14 you will find a fault in her?] you’ll ever feel her open to criticism?
187.17 You never will find one.] You won’t discover a fault in her.
187.18 “Perhaps not; but I think I shall not miss it.”] “Perhaps not. But I dare
say I shan’t miss it.”
187.19 She is always up to the mark!] She knows absolutely everything on
earth there is to know,
187.20 Isabel after this said to Madame Merle] Isabel after this observed to
their companion
187.21 Mrs. Touchett believed she had not a fault] Mrs. Touchett considered
she hadn’t a speck on her perfection
187.25 “I am obliged to you, but I am afraid your aunt has no perception of
spiritual things,” Madame Merle answered. ¶“Do you mean by that that you
have spiritual faults?” ¶“Ah no; I mean nothing so flat!] On which “I’m obliged
to you,” Madame Merle replied, “but I’m afraid your aunt imagines, or at least
alludes to, no aberrations that the clock-face doesn’t register.” ¶“So that you
mean you’ve a wild side that’s unknown to her?” ¶“Ah no, I fear my darkest
sides are my tamest.
187.34 Madame Merle’s conversation] Madame Merle’s own conversation
187.36 It never occurred to the girl,] It couldn’t occur to the girl
188.2 Isabel agreed with her] Isabel rose eagerly to the sense of her shades
188.5 and in the third, to speak to one without ceremony of one’s near
relations was an agreeable sign of intimacy] and it was clear in the third that
for a person to speak to one without ceremony of one’s near relations was an
agreeable sign of that person’s intimacy with one’s self
188.5 These signs of intimacy multiplied] These signs of deep communion
multiplied
188.8 Though she alluded frequently to the incidents of her own life,]
Though she referred frequently to the incidents of her own career
188.9 an egotist $...$ a gossip] a gross egotist $...$ a flat gossip
188.14 nothing that I shall not care to hear] nothing I shall not care to hear
188.17 we can have it outside of us,] we can have it outside,
188.21 some old people that I adore. But I shall never be ill-natured with
the young; they touch me too much.] some old people I adore. But I shall
never be anything but abject with the young; they touch me and appeal to
me too much.
188.22 I shall let it pass. I talk] I shall let it pass and horribly spoil you. I speak
188.24 I belong to the old world.] I belong to the old, old world.
188.25 I wish to talk about the new.] I want to talk about the new.
188.28 the land of my birth] that splendid, dreadful, funny country—surely
the greatest and drollest of them all
188.29 over here;] in these parts,
188.30 your own country] your own land
189.7 he has got a consumption] he has a consumption
189.8 His consumption is his career] His consumption’s his carrière
189.12 it’s impossible that anything should signify less] it’s impossible
anything should signify less
189.13 he has got a very pretty collection] he has a very pretty collection
189.19 in thinking your cousin is very lucky] in thinking your cousin very
lucky
189.29 that is all one can say about him] that’s all one can say about him or
make of him
189.30 as I say] as I tell you
189.31 that he is Mr. Osmond, who lives in Italy] he’s Mr. Osmond who lives
tout bêtement in Italy
190.2 you feel that he might do something] you feel he might do
something
190.4 he does speak of her] he does speak of her
190.17 competent way in which she took the measure] Copy text competent
way which she took of the measure; 1883 competent view which she took of the
measure; NYE competent way in which she took the measure
190.21 I don’t mean that his saying that] I don’t mean his saying that
190.23 I had said to him that I felt ill at my ease] I had told him I felt ill at
my ease
190.26 both of saying that poor Mr. Touchett would go] of saying both that
poor Mr. Touchett would go
190.31 he will miss his father sadly] he’ll miss his father immensely
191.5 the day when you begin] the day you begin
191.11 Justice is all I ask.] Justice is all I want.
191.15 the kindest fellow living] the kindest creature living
191.21 Isabel had a natural shrinking] she had a natural shrinking
191.23 a still tenderer love of ignorance] the finest capacity for ignorance
191.28 in her customary smile, was by no means disguised by it] in her
customary amplitude of ease, was imperfectly disguised by it
191.35 a beauty which I never had] a beauty that I never had
191.36 You have friends] You have many friends
192.2 You have memories, talents——] “You have memories, graces,
talents—
192.6 some pretence of action] some pretence of movement, of
unconsciousness
192.6 As for my memories,] As for my graces and memories
192.11 “Yes; I would make an effort to keep you,” Madame Merle rejoined,
looking at her gravely. “When I say I should like to be your age,” she went on, “I
mean with your qualities—] “Yes; I would make an effort to keep you.” And her
companion looked at her gravely. “When I say I should like to be your age I
mean with your qualities—
192.17 At last she said—¶“I am very ambitious!”] “I’m very ambitious!” she at
last replied.
192.20 They were great.] They were great.
192.24 an image of success] a vivid image of success
192.27 “You evidently think it must be very tame,” said Isabel.] “You evi-
dently think it must be a very tame one.
192.30 I am dreaming now.] I’m dreaming now!
192.31 to play with energy] grandly to play
192.33 but frightfully sad] yet frightfully sad
192.33 who had succeeded?] who had ever succeeded?
193.2 “I began to dream very young,” said Isabel, smiling.] “I began to dream
very young,” Isabel smiled.
193.6 a young man with a moustache] a young man with a fine moustache
193.8 “No, nor that either,” Isabel declared, blushing. ¶Madame Merle gave a
glance at her blush which caused it to deepen.] “No, nor that either,” Isabel
declared with still more emphasis. ¶Madame Merle appeared to note this
eagerness.
193.12 Isabel was silent for a moment, and then, with extreme and character-
istic inconsequence—] Isabel was silent a little but then spoke with extreme
and characteristic inconsequence.
193.14 is that what you mean?” cried her friend] is that what you mean?”
asked her friend
193.16 I congratulate you] I congratulate you with all my heart
193.26 a cluster of appurtenances. What do you call one’s self?] some cluster
of appurtenances. What shall we call our ‘self ’?
193.29 I know that a large part of myself is in the dresses I choose to wear.] I
know a large part of myself is in the clothes I choose to wear.
193.31 one’s house, one’s clothes, the books one reads] Copy text one’s house,
one’s clothes, the book one reads; one’s house, one’s furniture, one’s garments,
the books one reads
193.35 but she was unable] but was unable
194.1 “I don’t agree with you,” she said.] “I don’t agree with you.
194.4 on the contrary, it’s a limit] everything’s on the contrary a limit
194.7 “You dress very well,” interposed Madame Merle, skilfully.] “You dress
very well,” Madame Merle lightly interposed.
194.14 upon the sketch] on the sketch
194.15 the youthful loyalty which our heroine practised towards this accom-
plished woman] the youthful loyalty practiced by our heroine toward this
accomplished woman
194.17 Isabel had not concealed from her, however,] She had not, however,
concealed the fact
194.19 let her know that they were of a highly advantageous kind] let her
friend know of how advantageous a kind they had been
194.24 He had admirable self-control,] He had excellent ways,
194.28 during Madame Merle’s previous visits] during this lady’s previous
visits
194.29 much shorter than the present one—] much shorter than the
present—
194.32 to suspect him of being a suitor] to suspect him as a suitor
194.35 confidences which Isabel made her] confidences which our young
woman made her
195.5 Excuse me if my tone seems horribly worldly; one must take that view
sometimes.] Pardon me if my tone seems horribly corrupt; one must take the
worldly view sometimes.
195.22 or in town] or else in town
195.24 “I am going to six places in succession,” she said, “but I shall] “I’m
going to six places in succession, but I shall
195.27 you must think well of me] must think as well of me as possible
195.32 Isabel,] Our young lady,
195.33 the hours that Mrs. Touchett was invisible,] the hours during which
Mrs. Touchett was invisible
195.36 in mysterious and inscrutable exercises] apparently occupied there
with mysterious and inscrutable exercises
196.2 that it was a conviction] it was a conviction
196.2 whether her aunt repented] if her aunt repented
196.4 a zeal which had always deemed itself sufficient] a zeal always to its own
sense adequate
196.8 which she kept with exemplary neatness.] which she kept with exem-
plary neatness. Uttered reflection had with her ever, at any rate, a practical ring.
196.12 Her remarks had usually a practical ring.] omitted
196.19 spent much time in turning over the books] spent vague hours in
turning over books
196.23 she thought her public letters] she felt her public letters
196.31 Mr. Bantling, however, had] He had
197.2 and at any rate] and at least
197.4 and you ought to see how it pleases him] and you should see how that
pleases him
197.8 perhaps even he would go] perhaps even would go
197.12 passages from Miss Stackpole’s letters] passages from this
correspondence
197.14 the correspondent of the Interviewer] the representative of the
Interviewer
197.16 with an ex-guardsman!] with an ex-Lancer!
197.21 “Excuse me;] “Pardon me,
197.22 I have got the point of view] I’ve the point of view
197.31 the doctor’s dog-cart] the doctor’s brougham
197.32 the doctor’s remaining so long] his remaining so long
197.35 into the vehicle and drive away] into the vehicle and roll away
198.8 “My father died an hour ago.” ¶“Ah, my poor Ralph!” the girl
murmured, putting out her hand to him.] “My dear father died an hour
ago.” ¶“Ah, my poor Ralph!” she gently wailed, putting out her two hands
to him.
CHAPTER20
199.1 after this incident] after this
199.16 “He has treated me liberally,” she said] “He has treated me most
liberally,” she said
200.2 she received a subtle impression] she received an impression
200.2 Mr. Touchett’s death had had consequences] Mr. Touchett’s death had
had subtle consequences
200.7 But it had been one thing to foresee it mentally, and it was another to
behold it actually.] But it had been one thing to foresee such a matter mentally
and another to stand among its massive records.
200.12 I am far from wishing to say that Madame Merle was one of the
hungry ones of the world; but we have already perceived that she had desires
which had never been satisfied.] I am far from wishing to picture her as one of
the hungry mouths or envious hearts of the general herd, but we have already
learned of her having desires that had never been satisfied.
200.13 a most becoming smile] a fine proud smile
200.19 that if her private attitude at the present moment was somewhat
incongruously invidious, she was very careful not to betray herself] that if
she couldn’t at the present moment keep from quite perversely yearning she
was careful not to betray herself
200.22 a much better house in Florence] a much better one in Florence
200.25 whether I am obliged to leave] if I’m obliged to leave
200.27 He is of course left very well off] He’s naturally left very well off
200.33 Madame Merle repeated, softly] Madame Merle softly repeated
201.6 “There certainly was no effort; don’t call it an achievement.”] “There
assuredly was no effort. Don’t call it an achievement.”
201.7 Madame Merle was rarely guilty] Madame Merle was seldom guilty
201.18 Mrs. Touchett gave a shrug.] Mrs. Touchett reserved her opinion.
201.27 in the bank] in the affairs of the bank
201.32 just before it came out] before the will was read
202.6 with her eyes bent upon the floor] her eyes bent on the floor
202.6 she asked at last, looking up] she asked at last as she raised them
202.16 the kiss that she had received from Isabel] the kiss she had received
from her
202.18 the only allusion that Madame Merle $...$ made] the only allusion the
visitor $...$ made
202.19 Mrs. Touchett did not remain in London until she had sold her
house.] Mrs. Touchett had no purpose of awaiting in London the sale of her
house.
202.21 those objects which she wished to transport to her Florentine resi-
dence] the objects she wished to transport to her other abode
202.24 to contemplate the windfall] to measure and weigh and otherwise
handle the windfall
202.29 Isabel thought of it very often and looked at it in a dozen different lights;
but we shall not at present attempt to enter into her meditations or to explain why
it was that some of them were of a rather pessimistic cast. The pessimism of this
young lady was transient; she ultimately made up her mind] Isabel thought very
often of the fact of her accession of means, looking at it in a dozen different lights;
but we shall not now attempt to follow her train of thought or to explain exactly
why her new consciousness was at first oppressive. This failure to rise to
immediate joy was indeed but brief; the girl presently made up her mind
202.30 to do was sweet] and that to do could only be sweet
202.30 the contrary of weakness] the graceful contrary of the stupid side of
weakness—especially the feminine variety
202.31 a young lady] a delicate young person
202.32 it was true] it is true
202.35 compelled the two ladies to spend] compelled them to spend together
203.1 but she was not eager] but was not eager
203.3 indeed during a stay of some weeks which she presently made with her
aunt in Paris, but in ways that will probably be thought rather vulgar] during a
stay of some weeks which she eventually made with her aunt in Paris, though in
ways that will inevitably present themselves as trivial
203.4 the ways that most naturally presented themselves] the ways most
naturally imposed
203.6 especially under the guidance of Mrs. Touchett] and that were pre-
scribed unreservedly by the guidance of Mrs. Touchett
203.16 she saw no reason] saw no reason
203.23 Isabel saw them come $...$ to her aunt’s hotel] Isabel saw them arrive
$...$ at her aunt’s hotel
203.24 judged them with a trenchancy which is doubtless] and pronounced
on them with a trenchancy doubtless
203.26 their manner of life was superficial,] their lives were, though luxur-
ious, inane,
203.28 calling upon each other] calling on each other
203.30 Though her listeners were the most good-natured people in the
world, two or three of them thought her cleverness, which was generally
admitted, only a dangerous variation of impertinence.] Though her listeners
passed for people kept exemplarily genial by their cooks and dressmakers, two
or three of them thought her cleverness, which was generally admitted, inferior
to that of the new theatrical pieces.
204.8 Mrs. Luce used always to explain] Mrs. Luce used to explain
204.9 become very perfect] become quite perfect
204.20 In fact she was at home at all times, and led in her well-cushioned
little corner of the brilliant city as quiet and domestic a life as she might have
ed in her native Baltimore. The existence of Mr. Luce, her worthy husband,
was somewhat more inscrutable. Superficially indeed, there was no mystery
about it; the mystery lay deeper, and resided in the wonder of his supporting
existence at all. He was the most unoccupied man in Europe, for he not only
had no duties, but he had no pleasures. Habits certainly he had, but they were
few in number, and had been worn threadbare by forty years of use. Mr. Luce
was a tall, lean, grizzled, well-brushed gentleman] In fact she was at home at
all times, and reproduced with wondrous truth in her well-cushioned little
corner of the brilliant city, the domestic tone of her native Baltimore. This
reduced Mr. Luce, her worthy husband, a tall, lean, grizzled, well-brushed
gentleman
204.22 on the back of his head. He went every day to the American banker’s]
on the back of his head, to mere platonic praise of the “distractions” of Paris—
they were his great word—since you would never have guessed from what
cares he escaped to them. One of them was that he went every day to the
American banker’s
204.23 where there was a post-office which was almost as sociable and
colloquial an institution as that of an American country town] where he
found a post-office that was almost as sociable and colloquial an institution
as in an American country town
204.26 than any other in Paris] than any other in the French capital
204.30 his only known avocations] his only known pastimes
204.35 the French capital] this scene of his dissipations
204.36 In the list of his occupations his political reveries should not be
omitted] In the list of his resources his political reflections should not be
omitted
205.3 government recently established] government lately established
205.8 a fine government was that of the lately-abolished Empire] a fine showy
clever rule was that of the superseded Empire
205.9 he knew how to make a city pleasant] he knew how to make a city
pleasant
205.16 went as high as nine times] went as high as nine
205.18 a cloud over Paris till they get the Empire back again] a dark cloud
over Paris, our Paris, till they get the Empire back again
205.22 was a native of New York] was native to New York
205.24 an old and intimate friend] an early and intimate friend
205.26 the little Archers] the small Archers
205.27 and stopped at the hotel] and had stopped at the hotel
205.31 a bonne of his own] a bonne all his own
206.1 embroidered collar, became the countenance] embroidered collar had
become the countenance
206.2 she firmly believed] she had firmly believed
206.8 his bonne was dismissed] his bonne dismissed
206.10 to the nostril] to the nostrils
206.20 better draped than many a duchess] better draped than the high
shoulders of many a duchess
207.29 There is nothing for a gentleman to do in America.] There’s nothing
for a gentleman in America.
207.36 worse than Mr. Ralph Touchett] worse than poor Ralph Touchett
208.3 on her accession of fortune,] on her augmentations
208.6 she frankly said] she frankly asserted
208.15 I mean your moral tendencies.] I mean your exposure on the moral
side.
208.18 never become sensual] never become grossly sensual
208.24 interested in keeping up those illusions] interested in keeping
them up
208.26 she gazed upon this vivid but dusky picture of her future] she gazed at
this lurid scene
208.28 you think that you can lead] you think you can lead
208.30 put your soul into it] put your soul in it
208.32 it becomes reality] it becomes grim reality
209.12 of great intimacy] of great personal intimacy
209.22 and her amusement subsisted in the face of the fact] her amusement
moreover subsisted in face of the fact
209.25 the simplicity of each of them had been entrapped] the simplicity of
each had been entrapped
209.26 But this simplicity was none the less honourable on either side;] But
this simplicity was on either side none the less honourable.
209.29 on the part of her companion] on the part of his companion
209.32 Miss Stackpole’s coquetry. Each of these harmless confederates] Miss
Stackpole’s need of demonstrative affection. Each of these groping celibates
209.34 was somewhat eagerly conscious] was impatiently conscious
209.34 a rather slow and discursive habit] rather a slow and a discursive
habit
209.36 who charmed him with the spectacle of a brilliant eye and a kind of
bandbox neatness] who charmed him by the influence of a shining, challenging
eye and a kind of bandbox freshness
210.4 enjoyed the society of a fresh-looking, professionless gentleman, whose
leisured state, though generally indefensible, was a decided advantage to Miss
Stackpole] enjoyed the society of a gentleman who appeared somehow, in his
way, made, by expensive, roundabout, almost “quaint” processes, for her use,
and whose leisured state, though generally indefensible, was a decided boon to
a breathless mate
210.9 would make use of them in her correspondence] would largely and
showily address them to publicity
210.10 those mysterious shallows] those abysses of sophistication
210.13 permanent safety in the adoption of second-hand views] permanent
rest in any adoption of the views of a class pledged to all the old abuses
210.18 had spent with the good Mr. Bantling] had spent with this perfect man
of the world—a term that had ceased to make with her, as previously, for
opprobrium
210.21 she had made in the company of the gallant ex-guardsman] she had
enjoyed in his company
210.28 to meet Mr. Bantling in the spring, in Italy] to meet her gallant friend
during the spring in Italy
CHAPTER21
211.2 a day for her departure] the day for her departure
211.2 she had begun to travel] had begun to travel
211.3 She did not go directly to Florence, but interrupted her journey] She
interrupted her journey
211.6 under a white umbrella] beneath a slow-moving white umbrella
211.7 Mrs. Touchett, with her usual homely logic] Mrs. Touchett, with
homely, customary logic
211.11 “Now, of course, you are completely your own mistress,” she said.
“Excuse me; I don’t mean that you were not so before. But you are on a
different footing] “Now, of course, you’re completely your own mistress and
are as free as the bird on the bough. I don’t mean you were not so before, but
you’re at present on a different footing
211.17 to understand that you are at liberty] to understand how much you’re
at liberty
212.11 chance encounters with her] chance encounters and concussions
212.12 she was always to be found; but she was never over-inquisitive] she was
perfectly present, but was never over-inquisitive
212.17 no familiar moss] no familiar softening moss
212.18 Her passive extent] Her offered, her passive extent
212.21 Isabel had reason to believe, however, that as she advanced in life
she grew more disposed to confer those sentimental favours which she was
still unable to accept—to sacrifice consistency] Isabel had reason to believe
none the less that as she advanced in life she made more of those conces-
sions to the sense of something obscurely distinct from convenience—more
of them than she independently exacted. She was learning to sacrifice
consistency
212.25 for in former years] since in former years
212.28 that the Palazzo Crescentini contained a spacious apartment which
was known as the room of the signorino] that Palazzo Crescentini contained a
large apartment known as the quarter of the signorino
212.30 something that I have thought] something I’ve thought
212.33 Did you know that your father] Did you know your father
213.5 “Why, as a kind of souvenir.” ¶“He liked me too much,” said Isabel.]
“Why, as a kind of compliment.” ¶“A compliment on what?” ¶“On your so
beautifully existing.” ¶“He liked me too much,” she presently declared.
213.12 seem to you delicate.] seem to you delicate!
213.19 If you ask me,] If you ask me
213.23 Ralph said, more gravely. “I think it’s very good] Ralph went on more
gravely. “I think it very good
213.24 Isabel looked at him a moment] Isabel looked at him
213.34 trying to pull open a rosebud. Live as you like best, and your character
will form itself.] trying to pull open a tight, tender young rose. Live as you like
best, and your character will take care of itself.
213.36 “You have too much conscience,” Ralph added.] “You’ve too much
power of thought—above all too much conscience,” Ralph added.
214.2 Spread your wings; rise above the ground.] Put back your watch. Diet
your fever. Spread your wings; rise above the ground.
214.8 continuing to smile] persisting in cheer
214.9 Isabel went on] Isabel pursued
214.24 one must always be thinking] one must keep thinking
214.29 with a blush which the girl noticed] with a flush that the girl
noticed
215.1 she looked a while across the sea] she looked across the sea
215.4 on the edge of this larger knowledge; the stillness of these soft weeks
seemed good to her. They were a peaceful interlude in a career] on the edge of
this larger adventure; there was such a thrill even in the preliminary hovering.
It affected her moreover as a peaceful interlude, as a hush of the drum and fife
in a career
215.9 after Isabel had put] after their young friend had put
215.12 Madame Merle’s perspicacity] that lady’s perspicacity
215.15 at any rate before she left San Remo she had grown used to feeling
rich] she had at any rate before leaving San Remo grown used to feeling
rich
215.16 The consciousness found a place] The consciousness in question
found a proper place
215.17 ideas that she had about her herself] ideas that she had about herself
215.18 It was a perpetual implication of good intentions.] It took perpetually
for granted a thousand good intentions.
215.19 the fine things] the fine things to be done by
215.21 of her opportunities and obligations, might do, were really innumer-
able] of occasions and obligations were sublime in the mass
215.25 were intermingled with other reveries] were mixed with other debates
215.30 these gentlemen] these images of energy
215.36 its revival to wear the supernatural aspect of a resurrection. Isabel
moreover was not prone] its revival rather to show the livid light of a
judgement-day. The girl moreover was not prone
216.3 and yet, of all liberties] but of all liberties
216.6 and yet she did not regard them as appreciably in her debt] and yet
couldn’t but feel them appreciably in debt to her
216.9 Isabel did not say to herself] She had indeed failed to say to herself
216.16 she herself might change her humour—might weary of those
things that were not Caspar (and there were so many things that were
not Caspar!), and might find satisfaction in the very qualities which struck
her to-day as his limitations.] she herself might know the humiliation of
change, might really, for that matter, come to the end of the things that
were not Caspar (even though there appeared so many of them), and find
rest in those very elements of his presence which struck her now as
impediments to the finer respiration.
216.16 his limitations] these impediments
216.18 a fine granite breakwater] a brave granite breakwater
216.21 more than modesty should not only expect, but even desire] more
than a noble humility or an enlightened pride ought to wish to reckon with
216.22 to forget him, as a lover,] to preserve no record of what had passed
between them
216.23 eminently proper] eminently just
216.24 Isabel really believed] Isabel candidly believed
216.25 get over it] get over his disappointment
216.25 deeply smitten] deeply affected
216.28 a man so completely absolved from fidelity should stiffen himself in an
attitude it would be more graceful to discontinue] a man both so intelligent
and so honourably dealt with should cultivate a scar out of proportion to any
wound
216.29 Englishmen liked to be comfortable] Englishmen liked moreover to
be comfortable
216.30 in thinking of a self-sufficient American] in brooding over a self-
sufficient American
216.31 Isabel flattered herself] She flattered herself
216.32 some young lady] some young woman
216.34 without an impulse of jealousy] without a pang even of surprise
216.36 and this was grateful to her pride.] That alone was grateful to her pride.
CHAPTER22
217.2 a picturesque little group] a small group that might have been described
by a painter as composing well
217.3 an ancient villa which stood on the summit of an olive-muffled hill,] an
ancient villa crowning an olive-muffled hill
217.6 when looked at] when considered
217.12 a stone bench which ran along the base of the structure and usually
afforded a lounging-place] a stone bench lengthily adjusted to the base of the
structure and useful as a lounging-place
217.16 ancient $...$ front] antique $...$ front
217.17 It was the mask of the house; it was not its face.] It was the mask, not
the face of the house.
217.22 and old stone] and other old stone
217.29 seemed to be less] seemed less
218.1 these obstructive apertures] these jealous apertures
218.3 foreigners of conflicting nationality] foreigners of random race
218.6 much less gloomy than my indications may have represented] less
sombre than our indications may have represented
218.11 The place, moreover, was almost luxuriously comfortable; it told of
habitation being practised as a fine art. It contained a variety of those faded
hangings] It was moreover a seat of ease, indeed of luxury, telling of arrange-
ments subtly studied and refinements frankly proclaimed, and containing a
variety of those faded hangings
218.12 primitive specimens] angular specimens
218.13 in frames pedantically rusty] in frames as pedantically primitive
218.15 These things were intermingled] These things kept terms
218.16 in which liberal concession had been made to cultivated sensibilities]
in which large allowance had been made for a lounging generation
218.21 small modern pictures] small, odd, elaborate pictures
218.22 the moment when we begin] the moment we begin
218.26 their conversation] their talk
218.29 their attitude was noticeably provisional, and they evidently wished to
emphasise the transitory character of their presence] their attitude expressed a
final reserve and their faces showed the glaze of prudence
218.30 They were plain, comfortable, mild-faced women] They were plain,
ample, mild-featured women
218.32 linen and inexpressive serge gave an advantage] linen and of the serge
that draped them as if nailed on frames gave an advantage
218.34 and had evidently the responsibility] as well as the responsibility
219.1 This young lady wore her hat—a coiffure of extreme simplicity, which
was not at variance with a plain muslin gown, too short for the wearer] This
object of interest wore her hat—an ornament of extreme simplicity and not at
variance with her plain muslin gown, too short for her years
219.4 to entertain a nun is, in fact, a sufficiently delicate operation] it
being in its way as arduous to converse with the very meek as with the
very mighty
219.5 he was plainly much interested in his youthful companion] he was
clearly much occupied with their quiet charge
219.7 upon her slim, small figure] gravely on her slim, small figure
219.8 with a well-shaped head, upon which the hair] with a high but well-
shaped head, on which the hair
219.9 He had a thin, delicate, sharply-cut face] He had a fine, narrow,
extremely modelled and composed face
219.10 the only fault was that it looked too pointed] the only fault was just this
effect of its running a trifle too much to points
219.10 the shape of his beard] the shape of the beard
219.13 a picturesque upward flourish] a romantic upward flourish
219.14 a somewhat foreign, traditionary look,] a foreign, traditionary look
219.15 who studied effect] who studied style
219.16 His luminous intelligent eye, an eye which expressed both softness and
keenness—the nature of the observer] His conscious, curious eyes, however,
eyes at once vague and penetrating, intelligent and hard, expressive of the
observer
219.17 assured you, however, that] assured you that
219.19 his nationality] his original clime and country
219.23 he was one of those persons who, in the matter of race, may, as the
phrase is, pass for anything] but he suggested, fine gold coin as he was, no
stamp nor emblem of the common mintage that provides for general circula-
tion; he was the elegant complicated medal struck off for a special occasion
219.24 lean, lazy-looking figure] rather languid-looking figure
219.25 who takes little trouble about it] who takes little other trouble about it
than to have no vulgar things
219.28 that he was an Italian] he was Italian
219.29 The girl turned her head a little] The child turned her head earnestly
219.31 Yes, my child; I made it.] Certainly I made it.
219.34 a small, fair face, of which the natural and usual expression seemed to
be a smile of perfect sweetness] a small, fair face painted with a fixed and
intensely sweet smile
219.36 they are in my trunk,” said the child.] they’re in my trunk.”
220.11 for many years] many years
220.15 “Yes, sir,” the woman replied, gently.] “Yes, sir,” the visitor gently replied.
220.16 in my own language] in my own tongue
220.17 own tongue] proper language
220.21 but failed to understand it—“You are very complete,” he said,
instantly.] though failing to understand it, “You’re very complete,” he instantly
added.
220.31 She will remain little,” said the French sister.] She’ll remain—not big,”
said the French sister.
220.33 I like little women,” the gentleman declared, frankly. “But I know no
particular reason] I prefer women like books—very good and not too long. But
I know,” the gentleman said, “no particular reason
221.1 she looks well] she looks sound
221.4 a French accent] an accent
221.8 her smile brightened by pleasure. “May I, truly?” she asked.] her smile
heightened by pleasure. “May I truly?”
221.15 “You don’t spoil them,” said her father, smiling.] “You don’t spoil
them,” said her father gaily.
221.19 I have no doubt it is a very good one] I’ve no doubt it’s excellent
221.28 “Yes,” he said in a moment, “and what else?”] “Yes, and what else?”
221.30 thinking that she would say] thinking she would say
221.31 a good Christian was everything. ¶But for all her simplicity] a good
Christian was everything; but for all her simplicity
221.34 “She seems to me very nice,” said the father. “She is very pretty.”] “She
seems to me very gentille,” said the father. “She’s really pretty.”
222.3 She is our child] She’s our daughter
222.13 It is not certain that you will lose her; nothing is settled yet,” the host
rejoined,] It’s not certain you’ll lose her; nothing’s settled yet,” their host
rejoined
222.36 as another] as in the other
223.3 “I will take the red,” said mother Catherine,] “I’ll take the red, thank
you,” said mother Catherine
223.11 her father asked] her father enquired
223.27 the drawing-room] the saloon
223.33 who had stopped too,] who had also stopped,
224.14 asked Madame Merle] asked his new visitor
224.16 before her father’s visitors had time to reply] before the lady addressed
had time to reply
224.17 “I have been more than once, Pansy,” Madame Merle answered.] “I’ve
been more than once, Pansy,” Madame Merle declared.
224.20 I should leave the place] I should come away
224.23 come and see me] come to see me
224.24 you were here] you were there
224.27 a peculiar tone of voice] a particular tone of voice
224.35 said the host] said their entertainer
225.4 I decide nothing,” said Madame Merle, smiling still.] I decide nothing,”
said Madame Merle, but also as in pleasantry.
225.5 she is meant for the world] she’s very naturally meant for the
world
225.9 looking at Madame Merle’s elegant apparel] attentive to Madame
Merle’s elegant apparel
225.12 The child gazed at him] The child fixed him
225.13 ¶“Am I not meant for you, papa?” she asked.] “Am I not meant for
you, papa?”
225.16 “Be good, in any case] “Be good and wise and happy in any case
225.18 “I shall certainly come back and see you,” Pansy declared] “I shall
certainly come back and see you,” Pansy returned
225.21 my child] dear child
225.23 but not protesting] yet not protesting
225.28 she asked very gently] she nevertheless asked very gently
225.36 what little girls should do] what good little girls should do
226.1 “Oh yes, I obey very well,” said Pansy,] “Oh yes, I obey very well,” cried
Pansy
226.9 the child answered] the child made answer
226.13 Madame Merle meditated a moment.] Madame Merle meditated.
226.15 “But will they be pretty?”] “But very pretty?”
226.16 fond of pretty things] very fond of pretty things
226.18 “Well, they will not be too pretty,” Madame Merle answered] “Well,
they won’t be too pretty,” Madame Merle returned
226.20 and then, looking at her a moment—“Shall you miss mother
Catherine?”] after which, looking at her a moment, “Shall you miss mother
Catherine?” she went on.
226.32 you would have come to fetch Pansy] you’d have wished yourself to
fetch Pansy
226.36 I think you are very perverse] I think you very perverse
227.11 “Ah, that was better,” said Osmond. Then, at last, he dropped into a
chair,] “Ah, that was better,” Osmond conceded. With which he dropped into a
chair
227.12 leaning forward a little, with his elbows on the edge] bent forward a
little, his elbows on the edge
228.3 Madame Merle looked straight at her interlocutor, smiling.] Madame
Merle smiled straight at her host.
228.6 there is no reason why you should] there’s no reason why you
should
228.10 so much of everything] so much of every one else and of everything
228.13 I call your life—your ambitions] I call your life your ambitions
228.15 whether she understands] if she understands
228.17 gave a rather joyless smile] gave rather a joyless smile
228.17 “Go into the garden,” ma bonne] “Go into the garden,” mignonne
228.25 looking up at him with a certain nobleness of expression] looking up
at him with a certain courage
229.5 I will remember it] I do remember it
229.7 it may prove a great pleasure] it may prove a real interest
229.9 It is time you should make another, then.] It’s time then you should
make another.
229.14 Madame Merle reflected a moment.] Madame Merle waited.
229.16 If you say that, I believe it] If you say that, you know, I believe it
229.20 Excuse me. That isn’t a common sort of wisdom.] Pardon me. That
isn’t—the knowledge I impute to you—a common sort of wisdom.
229.22 an immense number of people] an immense number of more or less
impossible people
229.25 It will depend upon yourself.] It will depend on yourself.
229.29 Madame Merle flushed a little, and her eye betrayed vexation.]
Madame Merle flushed as with a wounded intention.
229.32 There is no one knows better than you that there are many things
worth an effort.” ¶“Many things, I admit. But they are none of them probable
things.”] No one knows better than you what is worth an effort. Haven’t I seen
you in old days?” ¶“I recognise some things. But they’re none of them probable
in this poor life.”
229.34 Who is your friend?] Who then is your friend?
230.1 The word niece suggests youth.] The word niece suggests youth and
ignorance.
230.2 twenty-two years old] twenty-three years old
230.4 we took a great fancy to each other] we struck up a grand alliance
230.11 never to speak to me of any one] never to speak to me of a creature
230.33 still more irrelevantly than before] still less relevantly than before
230.33 You have got some idea.] You have some idea.
230.33 You are never as well] You’re never so well
230.35 In the manner of these two persons, on first meeting on any occasion]
In the manner and tone of these two persons, meeting at any juncture
231.2 there was something $...$ which showed itself in glance and tone. They
approached each other obliquely, as it were, and they addressed each other]
was something $...$ as if they had approached each other obliquely and
addressed each other
231.4 an embarrassing degree] an appreciable degree
231.5 such embarrassments] any embarrassment
231.6 the manner] the form
231.7 to exhibit to her host] to wear for her host
231.8 The point I wish to make] The point to be made
231.8 the obstruction] the element between them
231.10 either of them ever was] either ever was
231.12 each of them on the whole] each on the whole
231.15 “I wish very much you were not so heartless,” said Madame
Merle, quietly.] “I wish very much you were not so heartless,” Madame
Merle quietly said.
231.22 that you should] need you should
231.23 the most remarkable woman] the most remarkable of women
231.26 when—when—” and he paused a moment.] when—when—” But he
paused a moment.
231.36 the Palazzo Crescentini] Palazzo Crescentini
232.4 no question that he could ask would find] no question he could ever
put would find
232.8 “Have you seen that—my last?”] “Have you seen what’s there—my
last?”
232.9 Madame Merle drew near and looked at it a moment.] Madame Merle
drew near and considered.
232.10 Is it the Venetian Alps] 1883 It is the Venetian Alps
232.12 Madame Merle looked for a moment longer; then she turned away.]
She looked a moment longer, then turned away.
232.16 But as the only thing you do, it’s so little.] But as the only thing you
do—well, it’s so little.
232.24 the pictures, the tapestries, the surfaces of faded silk. “Your rooms, at
least, are perfect,” she went on.] pictures, tapestries, surfaces of faded silk.
“Your rooms at least are perfect.
232.27 You understand this sort of thing as no one else does.” ¶“I am very
sick of it,” said Osmond.] You understand this sort of thing as nobody any-
where does. You’ve such adorable taste.” ¶“I’m sick of my adorable taste,” said
Gilbert Osmond.
232.28 “You must let Miss Archer come and see all this] “You must never-
theless let Miss Archer come and see it
232.30 As a cicerone in your own museum] As cicerone of your museum
232.34 Mr. Osmond $...$ simply turned upon his companion an eye expres-
sive of perfect clairvoyance. ¶“Did you say she was rich?” he asked in a
moment.] Mr. Osmond $...$ simply looked at once colder and more attentive.
“Did you say she was rich?”
233.3 Satisfactory woman—I mean you.] Satisfactory woman—I mean you.
233.12 “He’s an awful ass.”] “He’s a good deal of a donkey.”
233.16 Did you say that she was pretty?] Did you say she has looks?
233.17 disappointed] disappointed in them
233.20 Madame Merle was silent a moment.] Madame Merle was silent a
little.
233.22 The beginning of the end!] The beginning of the end?
233.24 She is a very delicate piece of machinery.] She’s not so coarse a piece of
machinery—nor am I.
233.28 Suspend your judgment till then.] Suspend your judgement.
233.30 Pansy has grown pretty] Pansy has really grown pretty
234.3 “We will go and get them,” said her companion.] “We’ll go and
get them.”
234.4 “She doesn’t like me,” murmured Madame Merle,] “She doesn’t like
me,” the visitor murmured
CHAPTER23
235.3 the hospitality of the Palazzo Crescentini] the hospitality of Palazzo
Crescentini
235.5 expressed the wish that she should know him; but made no such point
of the matter] expressed the hope she might know him; making, however, no
such point of the matter
235.12 the girl would find it well to know—of course, she said, Isabel could
know whomever she would—and she had placed Mr. Osmond near the top of
the list] the girl would find it well to “meet”—of course, she said, Isabel could
know whomever in the wide world she would—and had placed Mr. Osmond
near the top of the list
235.13 she had known him these ten years] she had known him these dozen
years
235.14 he was one of the cleverest and most agreeable men it was possible to
meet] he was one of the cleverest and most agreeable men—well, in Europe
simply
235.16 He was not perfect—far from it; the effect he produced] He wasn’t a
professional charmer—far from it, and the effect he produced
235.20 If he were not in the right mood he could be very unsatisfactory—like
most people, after all; but when he chose to exert himself no man could do it to
better purpose. He had his peculiarities] When not in the right mood he could
fall as low as any one, saved only by his looking at such hours rather like a
demoralised prince in exile. But if he cared or was interested or rightly
challenged—just exactly rightly it had to be—then one felt his cleverness and
his distinction. Those qualities didn’t depend, in him, as in so many people, on
his not committing or exposing himself. He had his perversities
235.21 and he did not cause] and didn’t cause
235.26 he was a person to know] he was a person not to miss
235.30 he had infinitely more taste; he had a taste which was quite by itself] it
was he who had most perception and taste—being artistic through and
through
235.31 during their multifarious colloquies] during their plunge,
236.1 the tie that united them] the tie binding these superior spirits
236.3 She was inclined to imagine that Madame Merle’s ties were peculiar,
and such a possibility was a part of the interest created by this suggestive
woman.] She felt that Madame Merle’s ties always somehow had histories, and
such an impression was part of the interest created by this inordinate woman.
236.5 Madame Merle hinted at nothing but a long-established and tranquil
friendship] she hinted at nothing but a long-established calm friendship
236.5 Isabel said that she should be happy] Isabel said she should be happy
236.6 her friend’s confidence] so high a confidence
236.12 Isabel repeated, with that exceedingly serious gaze which sometimes
seemed to proclaim that she was deficient in a sense of humour—an intima-
tion which at other moments she effectively refuted. “I am not afraid of
them!”] Copy text Isabel repeated, with that exceedingly serious gaze which
sometimes seemed to proclaim that she was deficient in a sense of humour—
an intimation which at other moments she effectively refuted. “I am not
afraid of them?”; NYE Isabel repeated with that solemn stare which some-
times seemed to proclaim her deficient in the sense of comedy. “Why, I’m not
afraid of them—I’m as used to them as the cook to the butcher-boys.”
236.17 This remark had a bitterness which Madame Merle did not often allow
herself to betray; but Isabel was not alarmed by it] This was a note of cynicism
that Madame Merle didn’t often allow herself to sound; but Isabel was not
alarmed
236.20 This sentiment was excited, however,] It was excited, none the less,
236.23 she had clever companions to call attention to latent merits] she had
clever companions as priests to the mystery
236.24 Ralph found it a pleasure which renewed his own earlier sensations,]
Ralph found it a joy that renewed his own early passion
236.27 she had seen the treasures of Florence so often, and she had always
something to do] she had seen the treasures of Florence again and again and
had always something else to do
236.28 she remembered the right-hand angle in the large Perugino] she
recalled the right-hand corner of the large Perugino
236.30 in the picture next to it; and had her own opinions] in the picture next
to it. She had her opinions
236.33 discussions which took place] discussions taking place
236.35 among the advantages which—for instance—she could not have
enjoyed in Albany] among the advantages she couldn’t have enjoyed for
instance in Albany
237.2 Isabel wandered about with her cousin] she wandered with her cousin
237.5 pictures and statues which had hitherto been] pictures and statues that
had hitherto been
237.14 cool rooms where carven rafters] cool rooms where the carven rafters
237.16 looked down upon the familiar commodities of the nineteenth]
looked down on the familiar commodities of the age of advertisement
237.31 the brightness of a garden in which nature itself looked as archaic as
the rugged architecture of the palace and which illumined the rooms that were
in regular use. Isabel found that to live in such a place might be a source of
happiness—almost of excitement. At first it had struck her as a sort of prison;
but very soon its prison-like quality became a merit, for she discovered that it
contained other prisoners than the members of her aunt’s household. The
spirit of the past was shut up there, like a refugee from the outer world; it
lurked in lonely corners, and, at night, haunted even the rooms in which
Mrs. Touchett diffused her matter-of-fact influence. Isabel used to hear
vague echoes and strange reverberations; she had a sense of the hovering of
unseen figures, of the flitting of ghosts. Often she paused, listening, half-
startled, half-disappointed, on the great cold stone staircase.] the brightness
of a garden where nature itself looked as archaic as the rugged architecture of
the palace and which cleared and scented the rooms in regular use. To live in
such a place was, for Isabel, to hold to her ear all day a shell of the sea of the
past. This vague eternal rumour kept her imagination awake.
237.36 the young lady seated almost out of sight at the other end of the room.
Isabel, on this occasion, took little share in the conversation; she scarcely even
smiled when the others turned to her appealingly; but sat there as an impartial
auditor of their brilliant discourse.] the young lady lurking at the other side of
the room. Isabel took on this occasion little part in the talk; she scarcely even
smiled when the others turned to her invitingly; she sat there as if she had been
at the play and had paid even a large sum for her place.
238.9 Mrs. Touchett was not present, and these two had it their own way.
They talked extremely well; it struck Isabel almost as a dramatic entertainment,
rehearsed in advance. Madame Merle referred everything to her, but the girl
answered nothing, though she knew that this attitude would make
Mr. Osmond think she was one of those dull people who bored him. It was
the worse, too, that Madame Merle would have told him she was almost as
much above the merely respectable average as he himself, and that she was
putting her friend dreadfully in the wrong. But this was no matter, for once;
even if more had depended on it, Isabel could not have made an attempt to
shine.] Mrs. Touchett was not present, and these two had it, for the effect of
brilliancy, all their own way. They talked of the Florentine, the Roman, the
cosmopolite world, and might have been distinguished performers figuring for
a charity. It all had the rich readiness that would have come from rehearsal.
Madame Merle appealed to her as if she had been on the stage, but she could
ignore any learnt cue without spoiling the scene—though of course she thus
put dreadfully in the wrong the friend who had told Mr. Osmond she could be
depended on. This was no matter for once; even if more had been involved she
could have made no attempt to shine.
238.10 There was something in Mr. Osmond that arrested her] There was
something in the visitor that checked her
238.11 made it seem more important that she should get an impression] made
it more important she should get an impression
238.13 Isabel had little skill] she had little skill
238.14 nothing could be more charming] nothing could be happier
238.15 to perform by arrangement] to glitter by arrangement
238.20 he had a well-bred air of expecting nothing; he was a quiet gentleman,
with a colourless manner, who said elaborate things with a great deal of
simplicity. Isabel, however, privately perceived that if he did not expect he
observed; she was very sure he was sensitive. His face, his head were sensitive]
he had a well-bred air of expecting nothing, a quiet ease that covered every-
thing, even the first show of his own wit. This was the more grateful as his face,
his head, was sensitive
238.21 the bridge, at the Uffizi] the bridge of the Uffizi
238.24 Mr. Osmond was very delicate; the tone of his voice alone would have
proved it. It was the visitor’s delicacy that made her abstain from interference.
His talk was like the tinkling of glass] And his very voice was fine—the more
strangely that, with its clearness, it yet somehow wasn’t sweet. This had had
really to do with making her abstain from interference. His utterance was the
vibration of glass
238.26 Before he went he made an appeal to her.] Yet before he went she had
to speak.
238.27 “Madame Merle says she will come up] “Madame Merle,” he said,
“consents to come up
238.31 I should be so glad] I should be so glad
238.32 And Mr. Osmond paused a moment,] And Mr. Osmond paused
238.35 Isabel answered] Isabel replied
239.2 Isabel fully expected that her friend] Isabel fully expected her friend
239.4 to her surprise, Madame Merle, who indeed never fell into the matter-
of-course] to her surprise that lady, who indeed never fell into the mere matter-
of-course,
239.10 displeasure she had known this lady to excite] displeasure she had
known this ally to excite
239.13 Madame Merle coloured a moment;] Madame Merle perceptibly
flushed,
239.16 I thought you liked him] I thought you liked him
239.20 with a sort of noble gentleness,] with her weary nobleness;
239.24 lead her to ask Ralph sundry questions] lead her to put to Ralph
sundry questions
239.25 She thought Ralph’s judgments cynical, but she flattered herself that
she had learned to make allowance] She thought Ralph’s judgements distorted
by his trials, but she flattered herself she had learned to make allowance
239.26 “Oh, yes, I know him] “Oh, yes, I ‘know’ him
239.30 He is a mysterious American $...$ living these twenty years, or more,
in Italy] He’s a vague, unexplained American $...$ living these thirty years, or
less, in Italy
239.30 Why do I call him mysterious?] Why do I call him unexplained?
239.32 For all I know] For all I do know
239.33 a fit of magnanimity,] a fit of fastidiousness
239.35 his abode in Florence] his abode here
239.35 hearing him say once] hearing him say
240.2 He’s a poor gentleman] He’s a poor but honest gentleman
240.4 married to some little Count] married to some small Count
240.6 but rather wicked] but rather impossible
240.14 The more information one has about a person the better.] The more
information one has about one’s dangers the better.
240.15 I don’t agree to that.] I don’t agree to that—it may make them dangers.
240.24 Isabel was silent a moment.] Isabel considered.
241.3 that you insinuate things] you insinuate things
241.8 exactly as I speak to her] exactly as I speak to her
241.15 “Ah, I protest!” Isabel cried with fervour. “If ever there was a woman
who made small claims——”] “Ah, I protest!” Isabel earnestly cried. “If ever
there was a woman who made small claims—!”
241.21 “She is perfect; she is the only woman I know who has but that one
little fault.”] “She’s indescribably blameless; a pathless desert of virtue; the only
woman I know who never gives one a chance.” ¶“A chance for what?” ¶“Well,
say to call her a fool! She’s the only woman I know who has but that one little
fault.”
241.29 she acts a little on my nerves,] she acts on my nerves
241.33 to peep from his eye] to peep from his face
241.34 “Do you wish Madame Merle to be banished?” she inquired.] “Do you
wish Madame Merle to be banished?”
242.4 Upon the character] On the character
242.13 she is the world itself!] she’s the great round world itself!
242.16 his entertainment] his refreshment
242.19 if he had not been able to find a great deal in the society of a woman in
whom the social virtues existed in polished perfection] if he had been left
wholly unbeguiled by such a mistress of the social art
242.21 in spite of the intellectual justice he rendered her,] in spite of the
administered justice she enjoyed at his hands,
242.22 life seem barren] life barren to him
242.26 But Ralph Touchett had learned to appreciate, and there could be no
better field for such a talent than the table-talk of Madame Merle. He talked
with her largely, treated her with conspicuous civility, occupied himself with
her and let her alone, with an opportuneness which she herself could not have
surpassed.] But Ralph Touchett had learned more or less inscrutably to attend,
and there could have been nothing so “sustained” to attend to as the general
performance of Madame Merle. He tasted her in sips, he let her stand, with an
opportuneness she herself could not have surpassed.
242.29 that she had been richly ambitious] she had been yearningly
ambitious
242.30 far below her ambition] far below her secret measure
242.30 but she had won] but had won
242.33 was universally liked] was almost as universally “liked” as some new
volume of smooth twaddle
242.36 The contrast $...$ which he vividly imagined her to have had her eyes
upon at various moments, had an element of the tragical.] The contrast $...$
that he supposed to have at various moments engaged her hope had an element
of the tragical.
242.36 their pliable guest] their genial guest
243.2 two people who dealt so largely in factitious theories of conduct] two
persons who dealt so largely in too-ingenious theories of conduct—that is of
their own—
243.3 He had given a great deal of consideration to Isabel’s intimacy with
Madame Merle—] He had given due consideration to Isabel’s intimacy with
her eminent friend,
243.6 he regarded it on the whole with philosophic tolerance] he made the
best of it, as he had done of worse things
243.8 when each of them had made certain discoveries,] when each had made
an important discovery or two
CHAPTER24
244.4 in May, in the full maturity of the Italian spring] in the full maturity of
the Tuscan spring
244.4 The two ladies] The companions
244.8 a perfume] a fragrance
244.9 the small superurban piazza $...$ of which] the small superurban
piazza $...$ where
244.11 formed the principal, or at least the most imposing, side] formed a
principal, or at least a very imposing, object
244.15 something rather severe about the place] something grave and strong
in the place
244.16 it would not be easy] you would need an act of energy
244.19 her companion] her conductress
244.21 with Mr. Osmond] with him
244.23 seated in the drawing-room] seated in the saloon
244.24 Mr. Osmond presented to Isabel] Mr. Osmond indicated to Isabel
244.26 just come out of a convent] just come out of her convent
244.27 a scanty white dress] a scant white dress
244.28 she wore a pair of slippers, tied] she wore her small shoes tied
244.31 that she was a woman of fashion] she was a woman of high fashion
245.2 a small, quickly-moving eye] small, quickly-moving eyes
245.5 Her face, however, thanks to a very human and feminine expres-
sion, was by no means disagreeable, and, as regards her appearance, it was
evident that she understood herself] Her expression, however, thanks to
various intensities of emphasis and wonder, of horror and joy, was not
inhuman, and, as regards her appearance, it was plain that she understood
herself
245.6 The soft brilliancy of her toilet] Her attire, voluminous and delicate,
bristling with elegance,
245.7 her attitudes were light and sudden, like those of a creature that
perched upon twigs] her attitudes were as light and sudden as those of a
creature who perched upon twigs
245.9 Isabel $...$ classified the Countess Gemini] Isabel $...$ classed her
245.13 on a casual view the Countess presented no appearance of wickedness.
Nothing could have been kinder or more innocent than her greeting to Isabel.]
to a casual view the Countess Gemini revealed no depths. Her demonstrations
suggested the violent waving of some flag of general truce—white silk with
fluttering streamers.
245.14 that I am glad] I’m glad
245.15 that it is only because] it’s only because
245.18 and if they receive an injury] and if it hurts them
245.19 I heard them panting] I heard them wheezing
245.20 one’s horses panting] one’s horses wheezing
245.24 he does know a horse] he knows a horse
245.24 In general the Italians don’t] In general Italians don’t
245.34 a variety of little jerks and glances, in a tone which, although it
expressed a high degree of good-nature, was rather shrill than sweet] a series
of little jerks and pecks, of roulades of shrillness, and in an accent that was as
some fond recall of good English, or rather of good American, in adversity
246.1 Isabel declared] Isabel returned
246.2 “Everything here seems to me very beautiful.”] “Everything seems to
me beautiful and precious.”
246.3 “I have got a few good things,” Mr. Osmond murmured] “I’ve a few
good things,” Mr. Osmond allowed
246.6 an odd mixture of the indifferent and the expressive] an odd mixture of
the detached and the involved
246.7 to intimate that nothing was of much consequence] to hint that
nothing but the right “values” was of any consequence
246.12 a kind of finish which was] a kind of finish that was
246.28 Poor Isabel was perhaps not aware] Poor Isabel was doubtless not aware
246.31 A man whom she had heard spoken of] A man she had heard
spoken of
246.35 rested naturally upon himself] rested naturally on his wit
246.36 for the moment, I am afraid,] for the moment, we judge,
247.2 What a fool I was to have invited these women here!] What a fool I was
to have let myself so needlessly in—!
247.16 cried the Countess, with a sharp laugh] cried the Countess with a
flutter of her ruffles
247.20 not sure that she saw] not sure she saw
247.29 smiling, but suspecting] smiling and suspecting
247.34 a divergence of opinions] a divergence of views
247.35 and he turned the conversation] he turned the conversation
248.1 who had taken Isabel’s hand for a moment] who had shyly brushed
Isabel’s fingers with her own
248.3 round her little waist] round her slimness
248.5 but conscious of an attraction] yet conscious of an attraction
248.10 every now and then] but every now and then
248.10 Isabel heard the Countess say something extravagant] Isabel heard the
Countess, at something said by her companion, plunge into the latter’s lucidity
as a poodle splashes after a thrown stick
248.12 abatements to such pleasure] abatements to the pleasure
248.13 the drawbacks were pretty numerous] the drawbacks were numerous
248.21 strangers were too apt to see Italy in rose-colour. On the whole it was
better than other countries, if one was content to lead a quiet life and take
things as they came. It was very dull sometimes, but there were advantages in
living in the country which contained the most beauty. There were certain
impressions that one could get only in Italy. There were others that one never
got there, and one got some that were very bad. But from time to time one got a
delightful one, which made up for everything. He was inclined to think that
Italy had spoiled a great many people] strangers were too apt to see such a
world as all romantic. It met the case soothingly for the human, for the social
failure—by which he meant the people who couldn’t “realise,” as they said, on
their sensibility: they could keep it about them there, in their poverty, without
ridicule, as you might keep an heirloom or an inconvenient entailed place that
brought you in nothing. Thus there were advantages in living in the country
which contained the greatest sum of beauty. Certain impressions you could get
only there. Others, favourable to life, you never got, and you got some that
were very bad. But from time to time you got one of a quality that made up for
everything. Italy, all the same, had spoiled a great many people
248.23 It made people idle] It made one idle
248.27 there was nothing tonic in an Italian life. One was out of the current;
one was not dans le mouvement, as the French said; one was too far from Paris
and London. “We are gloriously provincial, I assure you,” said Mr. Osmond] it
had no discipline for the character, didn’t cultivate in you, otherwise expressed,
the successful social and other “cheek” that flourished in Paris and London.
“We’re sweetly provincial,” said Mr. Osmond
248.33 When they are disagreeable it is bad enough] When they’re disagree-
able here it’s bad enough
248.34 As soon as you find you like them] As soon as you like them
249.1 she may be depended upon] she may be depended on
249.17 her soft plumage] her feathers
249.23 a laugh which $...$ was not ill-natured] a laugh which $...$ had also a
finer patience
249.26 I am only rather light.] I’m only rather an idiot and a bore.
249.35 “I’ll tell you in a moment,” she answered.] “I’ll tell you in a moment.”
250.7 “We shall hear next that poor Madame Merle is Metastasio!”
Gilbert Osmond murmured, with a little melancholy smile.] “We shall
hear next that poor Madame Merle is Metastasio!” Gilbert Osmond
resignedly sighed.
250.9 Mr. Osmond stood there,] her host stood there
250.10 with his hands in the pockets] his hands in the pockets
250.15 she felt that she was being entertained] she had what always gave her a
very private thrill, the consciousness of a new relation
250.16 the deep grass] the fine grass
250.17 things that were scattered] things scattered
250.18 her host should show her] Mr. Osmond should show her
250.23 Mr. Osmond said to her abruptly—¶“Miss Archer, what do you
think of my sister?” ¶Isabel turned, with a good deal of surprise.] Copy text
Mr. Osborne said to her abruptly— $...$; 1883 Mr. Osmond said to her
abruptly— $...$; NYE he said to her abruptly: “Miss Archer, what do you think
of my sister?” ¶She faced him with some surprise.
250.27 Osmond went on, smiling] he went on with his cool smile
250.29 too little observation of it] almost no observation of it
250.35 She’s a very good woman—better than she seems.] She’s a very honest
lady—more so than she seems.
250.36 she is not of a very serious disposition,] she’s not of a serious turn
251.1 a nasty husband] a horrid husband
251.3 a nasty husband is an awkward thing] a horrid husband’s an awkward
thing
251.7 Excuse my troubling you] Pardon my troubling you
251.12 as might appear to be most acceptable] as might appear most
acceptable
251.13 his carvings] his medallions
251.15 Isabel became conscious that the owner was more interesting still]
Isabel felt the owner much more so, and independently of them, thickly as they
seemed to overhang him
251.23 types which were already] types already
251.24 no class which offered a natural place] no class offering a natural place
251.26 Isabel did not say all these things to herself at the time; but she felt
them, and afterwards they became distinct.] It was not that she recognised all
these truths at the hour, but they were falling into order before her.
251.28 Mr. Osmond had the interest of rareness. It was not so much what he
said and did, but rather what he withheld, that distinguished him;] this “new
relation” would perhaps prove her very most distinguished. Madame Merle
had had that note of rarity, but what quite other power it immediately gained
when sounded by a man! It was not so much what he said and did, but rather
what he withheld, that marked him for her as by one of those signs of the highly
curious that he was showing her on the underside of old plates and in the
corner of sixteenth-century drawings:
251.30 Isabel had never met] She had never met
251.32 The peculiarity $...$ extended to his immaterial part] The peculiarity
$...$ extended to impalpabilities
252.1 our observant young lady as the signs of an unusual sensibility] our
sensitive young woman as signs of quality, of intensity, somehow as promises
of interest
252.4 in a serene, impersonal way] in a sorted, sifted, arranged world
252.7 his taste alone, perhaps; that was what made him so different from
every one else.] his taste alone perhaps, as a sick man consciously incurable
consults at last only his lawyer: that was what made him so different from every
one else.
252.11 Isabel was certainly far] She was certainly far
252.14 by saying that he was gloriously provincial—which was so
exactly the opposite of what she had supposed] by speaking of his
provincial side—which was exactly the side she would have taken him
most to lack
252.16 Isabel trusted that she should learn] She trusted she should learn
252.19 If Mr. Osmond were provincial, pray what were the characteristics of
the capital? Isabel could ask herself this question, in spite of having perceived
that her host was a shy personage; for such shyness as his] If it was provincial to
have that harmony, what then was the finish of the capital? And she could put
this question in spite of so feeling her host a shy personage; since such shyness
as his
252.22 a proof of superior qualities. Mr. Osmond was not a man of easy
assurance] a proof of standards and touchstones other than the vulgar: he must
be so sure the vulgar would be first on the ground. He wasn’t a man of easy
assurance
252.24 he probably took] probably took
252.30 If he had not been shy, he would not have made that gradual, subtle,
successful effort to overcome his shyness, to which Isabel felt that she owed
both what pleased and what puzzled her in his conversation to-day. His
suddenly asking her what she thought of the Countess Gemini—] If he had
not been shy he wouldn’t have effected that gradual, subtle, successful
conversion of it to which she owed both what pleased her in him and what
mystified her. If he had suddenly asked her what she thought of the Countess
Gemini,
252.31 he was interested in her feelings] he was interested in her
252.33 singular that he should sacrifice] singular he should sacrifice
252.36 picturesque objects] romantic objects
253.1 Every thing was very curious and valuable] Everything was in the last
degree curious and precious
253.3 still holding his little girl] and still held his little girl
253.4 our young lady] our young friend
253.8 but she was not thinking] but was not thinking
253.10 He probably thought she was cleverer than she was; Madame Merle
would have told him so] He probably thought her quicker, cleverer in every
way, more prepared, than she was. Madame Merle would have pleasantly
exaggerated
253.12 her real cleverness would not reconcile him] her real intelligence
wouldn’t reconcile him
253.17 a liking for something which her host] a liking for something he
253.19 She was very careful,] She had no wish to fall into that grotesqueness—
in which she had seen women (and it was a warning) serenely, yet ignobly,
flounder. She was very careful
253.25 the view, which constituted the paramount distinction] the view, the
paramount distinction
253.29 the tray] the preparations
253.31 seemed to glow] glowed
254.2 Mr. Osmond said] Osmond said
254.4 Isabel answered] she returned
254.10 a woman often wastes] she often wastes
254.13 said Isabel, smiling] smiled Isabel
254.19 “It must have been a very pleasant one,” said Isabel.] “It must have
been a very pleasant one,” Isabel permitted herself to observe.
254.28 To be content with a little.] To be content with little.
254.30 He uttered these sentences slowly, with little pauses between, and
his intellignt eyes were fixed upon Isabel’s with the conscious look of a
man] He spoke these sentences slowly, with short pauses between, and
his intelligent regard was fixed on his visitor’s with the conscious air
of a man
254.31 “Do you call that simple?” Isabel asked, with a gentle laugh.] “Do you
call that simple?” she asked with mild irony.
254.35 not my natural indifference—I had none] not my natural
indifference—I had none
255.1 Isabel scarcely understood him] She scarcely understood him
255.12 since I couldn’t be] since that couldn’t be
255.14 A gentleman can always consider himself, and fortunately, I was a
gentleman.] The leanest gentleman can always consider himself, and fortu-
nately I was, though lean, a gentleman.
255.16 to go out of the country] to get out of the country
255.18 I was too fond to leave it. So I have passed a great many years
here, on that quiet plan I spoke of. I have not been at all unhappy.] I was
too fond to leave it, to say nothing of my being too well satisfied with it,
on the whole, as it then was, to wish it altered. So I’ve passed a great
many years here on that quiet plan I spoke of. I’ve not been at all
unhappy.
255.23 daubed over by some inspired idiot!] daubed over by some inspired
idiot.
255.28 of course she could not expect him] naturally she couldn’t expect him
255.30 more familiar and less considerate than she now desired to be] more
familiar and less considerate than she now desired to be—would in fact be
uproariously vulgar
255.32 to express considerable sympathy] to express a measured sympathy
255.36 “Oh, I have been very happy; don’t imagine me to suggest for a
moment that I have not. It’s one’s own fault if one is not happy.”] “Oh, I’ve
made in my way a good thing of it. Don’t imagine I’m whining about it. It’s
one’s own fault if one isn’t happy.” ¶This was large; she kept down to some-
thing smaller.
256.5 and it is very possible she may not care] and may very possibly not care
256.6 what is best for her] what’s best for Pansy
256.8 “Ah,” cried Gilbert Osmond, with feeling, “she is a little saint of
heaven!] “Ah,” cried Gilbert Osmond beautifully, “she’s a little saint of
heaven!
CHAPTER25
Chapter 25
257.2 While this $...$ was going on,] While this $...$ went forward
257.6 being of a more nervous temperament than Madame Merle] being of a
more nervous temperament than her friend
257.13 found the time ripe for saying something discordant; a necessity of
which she had been conscious for the last twenty minutes] found the time ripe
for one of her pretty perversities. She might have desired for some minutes to
place it
257.15 and she followed the pair for a while with her eyes] to which point her
eyes followed them
257.16 then observed to Madame Merle,] then observed to her companion,
257.20 Countess nodded towards the retreating couple] Countess nodded at
the sequestered couple
257.23 “You know $...$” she answered, smiling] “You know $...$” she
smiled
257.25 I see that, just now, you don’t wish to.] I see that just now you don’t
wish.
257.27 said Madame Merle, gravely, but without bitterness] said Madame
Merle gravely, yet without bitterness
258.1 a very sharp one] a poisoned one
258.2 I shall suffer from your saying it] I shall suffer from your sense of our
difference
258.4 “Why so?” asked Madame Merle; “what difference will it make?”]
“Why so?” asked Madame Merle. “To what will it conduce?”
258.12 to discover it] to discover that
258.13 No, I have not had time for that.] No, I’ve not had time.
258.16 “So do I,” Madame Merle declared.] “So do I,” Madame Merle
mentioned.
258.19 “That, indeed,” cried the Countess, with a laugh,] “That indeed,”
piped the Countess,
258.22 The Countess’s manner was impertinent, but she did not suffer this to
discompose her;] The Countess’s manner was odious, was really low; but it was
an old story,
258.24 “My dear lady,” she said at last] “My dear lady,” she finally resumed
258.33 She is not to be subjected to force.] She’s not exposed to compulsion or
deception.
259.1 “You had better leave us alone, then,” said Madame Merle, smiling.]
“You had better leave us alone then,” smiled Madame Merle.
259.8 “Ah, you are dangerous,” she cried, “even by yourself!”] “Ah, you are
dangerous—even by yourself!”
259.16 and she, at present, though she had her face turned to the opposite
prospect, was evidently not scrutinising it] and she at present was evidently not
lost in the mere impersonal view, persistently as she gazed at it
259.19 “Yes, I think so!” she said.] “Yes, I think so!” she pronounced.
259.21 The shabby footboy, summoned by Pansy, had come out with a small
table, which he placed upon the grass] The shabby footboy, summoned by
Pansy—he might, tarnished as to livery and quaint as to type, have issued from
some stray sketch of old-time manners, been “put in” by the brush of a Longhi
or a Goya—had come out with a small table and placed it on the grass
259.22 after which he again disappeared] after which he had again disappeared
259.26 to offer assistance to the servant] to offer assistance
259.32 a little toilet] a little toilette
259.35 Pansy reflected a moment, looking gravely] Pansy reflected a moment,
turning gravely
260.6 The child stroked down her antiquated skirt, sparingly.] The child
sparingly stroked down her antiquated skirt.
260.11 Madame Merle understands them better; ask her.] Madame Merle
understands them better. Ask her.
260.12 Madame Merle smiled with her usual geniality.] Madame Merle
smiled with her usual grace.
260.23 “Ah, $...$,” said Pansy.] “Ah, $...$,” Pansy objected.
260.24 “Miss Archer $...$,” Madame Merle remarked.] “Miss Archer $...$,”
said Madame Merle.
260.28 “She is charming—charming,” said Pansy, $...$ “She pleases me
exceedingly.”] “She’s charming—charming,” Pansy repeated. $...$ “She pleases
me thoroughly.”
260.29 “And you think she pleases your father?”] “And how do you think she
pleases your father?”
260.33 Pansy $...$ went off to summon the others, who were still lingering]
Pansy $...$ departed to summon the others, who had still lingered
260.35 to know whether the child likes her] to know if the child likes her
261.5 her marrying well] her marrying fortunately
261.9 You didn’t marry well] You didn’t marry fortunately
261.13 “You are irritated $...$,” she said, presently.] “You’re irritated $...$,”
she presently said.
261.14 to your brother, or to your niece’s, marrying] to your brother’s or to
your niece’s marrying
261.23 Madame Merle shook her head, with a smile of sadness.] Madame
Merle shook her head as for quiet amusement.
261.25 Isabel and Mr. Osmond were now coming toward them] Isabel and
Mr. Osmond were now slowly coming toward them
261.36 I have never, no never, seen any one of Osmond’s pretensions!] I’ve
never, no, no, never, seen any one of Osmond’s pretensions!
262.1 What they are all based upon is more than I can say.] What they’re all
founded on is more than I can say.
262.4 I suppose I should have got some inkling] I presume I should have got
some inkling
262.19 The child’s a little duchess.] The child’s a little princess.
262.21 But he can try.] Yet he can try.
262.31 it is a pity she is so nice] it’s a pity she’s so charming
262.35 “Yes,” rejoined the Countess,] “Yes,” returned the Countess
262.36 he is very hard to please] he’s very hard to satisfy
262.36 That makes me fear for her happiness!] That makes me tremble for
her happiness!
CHAPTER26
263.2 he came to the Palazzo Crescentini] he came to Palazzo
Crescentini
263.7 Mrs. Touchett’s charms] Mrs. Touchett’s worth
263.8 she had never observed that he selected for such visits] she had never
observed him select for such visits
263.16 Mr. Osmond $...$ would have been willing at any time to take the
hospitable view of his idiosyncracies] Mr. Osmond $...$ was willing at any
time to look at him in the light of hospitality
263.21 he should admire an admirable person] he should be curious of so rare
an apparition
263.21 his mother said] his mother observed
263.21 it was very plain] it was plain
263.24 Mrs. Touchett had always liked Mr. Osmond; she thought him so
much of a gentleman.] Mrs. Touchett had from far back found a place on her
scant list for this gentleman, though wondering dimly by what art and what
process—so negative and so wise as they were—he had everywhere effectively
imposed himself.
263.26 he was recommended to Mrs. Touchett] he was recommended to her
263.27 a quality that always excited her esteem] a quality that always, oddly
enough, affected her as providing ground for a relation with her
264.1 a young lady for whom Lord Warburton had not been up to the mark]
a young lady with whom Lord Warburton had not successfully wrestled
264.3 an overgrown daughter and an income of nothing—] an uncanny child
and an ambiguous income,
264.8 her answering] Isabel’s answering
264.9 knew that she had listened to others, but that she had made them listen
to her in return] knew she listened to several parties, as his father would have
said, but had made them listen in return
264.11 in these few months that he had known her, he should see a third
suitor] in these few months of his knowing her he should observe a fresh suitor
264.14 a succession of gentlemen going down on their knees to her was by
itself a respectable chapter of experience] a succession of fine gentlemen going
down on their knees to her would do as well as anything else
264.14 to a fourth and a fifth soupirant] to a fourth, a fifth, a tenth besieger
264.15 that she would stop] she would stop
264.21 too many metaphors] too many figures of speech
264.23 in spite of all your similes] in spite of all your comparisons
264.24 to find a favourable comparison for anything] to find a fine one
herself for anything
264.30 she is capable of marrying Mr. Osmond for his opinions] she’s
capable of marrying Mr. Osmond for the beauty of his opinions or for his
autograph of Michael Angelo
264.32 Will he be so disinterested] Will he be so disinterested
264.35 she should be sure, herself] she shall herself be sure
265.3 studying human nature and retaining her liberty] studying human
nature at close quarters and yet retaining her liberty
265.8 but she was] but was
265.11 whether that man is making love] whether that curious creature’s
really making love
265.13 Madame Merle opened her expressive eyes, and with a brilliant
smile—] “Gilbert Osmond?” Madame Merle widened her clear eyes and,
with a full intelligence,
265.14 “Has it never occurred to you?”] “Hadn’t it occurred to you?”
265.16 “You make me feel like a fool—but I confess it hasn’t. I wonder,”
added Madame Merle, “whether it has occurred to her.”] “You make me feel
an idiot, but I confess it hadn’t. I wonder,” she added, “if it has occurred to
Isabel.”
265.17 “I think I will ask her,” said Mrs. Touchett.] “Oh, I shall now ask her,”
said Mrs. Touchett.
265.18 Madame Merle reflected a moment.] Madame Merle reflected.
265.20 “it’s none of my business.”] “I won’t have him enquire of me—as he
perfectly may with that air of his, given Isabel’s situation—what business it is
of mine.”
265.25 “I will ask him myself,” Madame Merle declared, bravely. ¶“It’s none
of yours, either.” ¶“That’s precisely why I can afford to ask him; it is so much
less my business than any one’s else, that in me the question will not seem to
him embarrassing.”] “I’ll ask him myself,” Madame Merle bravely declared.
¶“But what business—for him—is it of yours?” ¶“It’s being none whatever is
just why I can afford to speak. It’s so much less my business than any one’s else
that he can put me off with anything he chooses. But it will be by the way he
does this that I shall know.”
265.28 “Pray let me know on the first day, then,” said Mrs. Touchett. “If I
can’t speak to him, at least I can speak to her.” ¶“Don’t be too quick with her;
don’t inflame her imagination.”] “Pray let me hear then,” said Mrs. Touchett,
“of the fruits of your penetration. If I can’t speak to him, however, at least I can
speak to Isabel.” ¶Her companion sounded at this the note of warning. “Don’t
be too quick with her. Don’t inflame her imagination.”
265.30 “I never did anything to any one’s imagination. But I am always sure
she will do something I don’t like.”] “I never did anything in my life to any one’s
imagination. But I’m always sure of her doing something—well, not of my kind.”
265.31 You wouldn’t] No, you wouldn’t
265.33 “Why should I, pray? Mr. Osmond has nothing to offer.”] “Why in the
world should I, pray? Mr. Osmond has nothing the least solid to offer.”
265.35 more than usual] even more charmingly than usual]
266.1 he is a man who under favourable circumstances might very well make
an impression] he is a man who in favourable conditions might very well make
a great impression
266.3 “Don’t tell me about his love-affairs] “Don’t tell me about his probably
quite cold-blooded love-affairs
266.6 a grown-up daughter] a more or less pert little daughter
266.7 The early masters are worth] The early masters are now worth
266.8 a very young and very harmless person] a very young and very
innocent and very harmless person
266.9 she is an insipid school-girl] she’s an insipid little chit
266.13 the child] the poor child
266.14 Another reason for Mr. Osmond stopping] Another reason then for
Mr. Osmond’s stopping
266.15 we shall have Isabel] we shall have my niece
266.18 “She would make a charming stepmother,” said Madame Merle,
smiling] “She would make a charming stepmother,” smiled Madame Merle
266.21 Changing one’s mission is often awkward! I will investigate and report
to you.] Changing the form of one’s mission’s almost as difficult as changing
the shape of one’s nose: there they are, each, in the middle of one’s face
and one’s character—one has to begin too far back. But I’ll investigate and
report to you.
266.22 no suspicion] no suspicions
266.25 to Mr. Osmond] to him
266.26 who came] who now arrived
266.27 Isabel thought him very pleasant; she liked to think of him.]
Isabel thought him interesting—she came back to that; she liked so to
think of him.
266.30 an image $...$ which happened to take her fancy particularly—] an
image $...$ which put on for her a particular harmony with other supposed
and divined things, histories within histories:
266.33 a little girl whose sympathetic docility gave a new aspect to childhood]
a little girl whose bell-like clearness gave a new grace to childhood
266.33 The picture was not brilliant] The picture had no flourishes
267.1 It seemed to tell a story—a story of the sort that touched her most
easily; to speak of a serious choice, a choice between things of a shallow, and
things of a deep, interest] It spoke of the kind of personal issue that touched her
most nearly; of the choice between objects, subjects, contacts—what might she
call them?—of a thin and those of a rich association
267.2 a feeling] of a feeling
267.6 a care for beauty and perfection so natural and so cultivated together,
that it had been the main occupation of a lifetime of which the arid places were
watered with the sweet sense of a quaint, half-anxious, half-helpless father-
hood] of a care for beauty and perfection so natural and so cultivated together
that the career appeared to stretch beneath it in the disposed vistas and with the
ranges of steps and terraces and fountains of a formal Italian garden—allowing
only for arid places freshened by the natural dews of a quaint half-anxious,
half-helpless fatherhood
267.6 At the Palazzo Crescentini] At Palazzo Crescentini
267.7 shy at first,] diffident at first—oh self-conscious beyond doubt!
267.10 and always effective, talk] always suggestive talk
267.14 on his own side] on his own side of the question
267.15 in particular] in especial
267.17 What continued to please this young lady was his extraordinary
subtlety. There was such a fine intellectual intention in what he said, and the
movement of his wit was like that of a quick-flashing blade.] What continued
to please this young woman was that while he talked so for amusement he
didn’t talk, as she had heard people, for “effect.” He uttered his ideas as if, odd
as they often appeared, he were used to them and had lived with them; old
polished knobs and heads and handles, of precious substance, that could be
fitted if necessary to new walking-sticks—not switches plucked in destitution
from the common tree and then too elegantly waved about.
267.18 his little daughter] his small daughter
267.18 Isabel was delighted] she rejoiced
267.21 a young girl] a little person
267.22 the daughters of England] the maidens of England
267.24 This young lady was so neat, so complete in her manner; and yet in
character, as one could see] Pansy was so formed and finished for her tiny place
in the world, and yet in imagination, as one could see
267.33 Mrs. Touchett $...$ declared] Mrs. Touchett $...$ pronounced
267.35 The Countess Gemini was indeed the occasion of a slight discussion]
The Countess gave rise indeed to some discussion
268.1 Madame Merle $...$ availed herself humorously] Madame Merle $...$
availed herself felicitously enough
268.3 Mrs. Touchett had pronounced] Mrs. Touchett had declared
268.4 the Countess Gemini] this highly compromised character
268.4 at this time of day] at such a time of day
268.6 at the Palazzo Crescentini] at Palazzo Crescentini
268.8 estimate which prevailed under this roof; it represented Mr. Osmond’s
sister as a kind of flighty reprobate.] estimate prevailing under that roof: it
represented Mr. Osmond’s sister as a lady who had so mismanaged her
improprieties that they had ceased to hang together at all—which was at the
least what one asked of such matters—and had become the mere floating
fragments of a wrecked renown, incommoding social circulation.
268.9 her mother—a heartless featherhead like herself] her mother—a more
administrative person
268.13 consciousness of neglect] consciousness of outrage
268.14 The Countess $...$ had consoled herself too well, and it was notorious
in Florence that she had consoled others also.] The Countess $...$ had con-
soled herself outrageously, and the list of her excuses had now lost itself in the
labyrinth of her adventures.
268.18 the unhappy lady] the luckless lady
268.20 make a scapegoat of that poor Countess, who had really done no
harm] make a scapegoat of a woman who had really done no harm
268.29 It was a long time since one had heard anything about her] For ever so
long now one had heard nothing about her
268.33 the Countess Gemini] the unfortunate lady
269.1 she was still perfectly capable of these rather primitive sequences of
feeling] she was still capable of these primitive sequences
269.2 but she was thankful] but was thankful
269.3 to repair this accident] to repair the accident
269.4 Had not Mr. Osmond declared that she was a good woman?] Had not
Mr. Osmond remarked that she was a respectable person?
269.5 this was rather a rough statement;] this was a crude proposition,
269.9 so poor] of such small estate
269.10 Amy Osmond, in spite of her being no beauty] Amy Osmond, in spite
of the questionable beauty which had yet not hampered her career
269.15 every excuse] every pretext
269.17 Her mother, who had pretensions to “culture,” wrote descriptive
poems,] Her mother, who had bristled with pretensions to elegant learning
and published descriptive poems
269.19 the father having died long before] the father, lost in the grey
American dawn of the situation, but reputed originally rich and wild, having
died much earlier
269.20 Madame Merle thought] Madame Merle held
269.23 Mrs. Osmond liked] Mrs. Osmond had liked
269.25 the years that followed her arrival] the year that followed her arrival
269.29 The Countess was very good company, and not such a fool as she
seemed; one got on with her perfectly if one observed a single simple
condition—that of not believing a word she said] The Countess was very
good company and not really the featherhead she seemed; all one had to do
with her was to observe the simple condition of not believing a word she said
269.30 he always appreciated] he appreciated
269.32 he was rather ashamed of her] he rather felt she let down their
common name
269.34 he couldn’t like her style, her loudness, her want of repose. She
displeased him; she acted on his nerves] he couldn’t like her style, her shrill-
ness, her egotism, her violations of taste and above all of truth: she acted badly
on his nerves
269.35 Oh, the opposite of the Countess, a woman who should always speak
the truth.] Oh, the very opposite of the Countess, a woman to whom the truth
should be habitually sacred.
269.36 the number of fibs her visitor had told her;] the number of times her
visitor had, in half an hour, profaned it:
270.3 how nasty] how base
270.5 in Paris, or London, or St. Petersburg] in Paris, in London, in
Washington
270.9 Isabel’s account of her conversation with this plaintive butterfly;]
Isabel’s account of this passage,
270.13 Isabel had another visitor] Isabel had meanwhile another visitor
270.16 arrived in Florence] reached the banks of the Arno
270.19 Madame Merle $...$ comprehended her, and, after a moment’s con-
centrated reflection, determined to like her] Madame Merle $...$ took her in
from head to foot, and after a pang of despair determined to endure her
270.22 To like her was impossible; but the intenser sentiment might be
managed. Madame Merle managed it beautifully, and Isabel felt that in
foreseeing this event she had done justice to her friend’s breadth of mind.]
She mightn’t be inhaled as a rose, but she might be grasped as a nettle.
Madame Merle genially squeezed her into insignificance, and Isabel felt
that in foreseeing this liberality she had done justice to her friend’s
intelligence.
270.25 came to the Palazzo Crescentini] called at Palazzo Crescentini
270.30 openly expressed only by Ralph Touchett] uttered only by Ralph
Touchett
270.33 indulged in Heaven knows what genial pleasantries on the subject of
the incisive Miss Stackpole and her British ally] indulged in goodness knew
what strong comedy on the subject of the all-judging one and her British
backer
270.34 artlessly confessed] candidly confessed
270.34 an intellectual flirtation] a positive intellectual adventure
271.1 how it would look] how what she did, how what they did—and they had
done things!—would look
271.2 how it looked] how anything looked
271.4 whether she ever would care] if she ever would care
271.5 he should stop first] he should break down first
271.6 no signs of stopping at all] no signs of breaking down
271.7 Her prospects, as we know, had brightened upon her leaving England]
Her prospects had brightened on her leaving England
271.14 as Miss Stackpole ingeniously remarked] as she ingeniously
remarked
271.17 It is mortifying to be obliged to confess it] The admission costs her
historian a pang
271.29 he was brought up at Eton, where they study nothing but Latin]
he had been bred at Eton, where they study nothing but Latin and
Whyte-Melville
272.1 a well-tested companion] a trusty companion
272.2 the fact that she had other calls upon her sympathy] the fact of other
calls on this lady’s attention
272.4 This lady professed] She professed
272.18 Isabel saw Gilbert Osmond before she started, and mentioned her
intention to him. ¶“I should like to be in Rome with you,” he said; “I should
like to see you there.” ¶She hesitated a moment. ¶“You might come, then.”]
One of Isabel’s preparations consisted of her seeing Gilbert Osmond before she
started and mentioning her intention to him. ¶“I should like to be in Rome
with you,” he commented. “I should like to see you on that wonderful ground.”
¶She scarcely faltered. “You might come then.”
272.22 but you’ll like it] but you’ll rave about it
272.24 “Ought I to dislike it, because it’s spoiled?” she asked.] “Ought I to
dislike it because, poor old dear—the Niobe of Nations, you know—it has been
spoiled?” she asked.
272.25 “No, I think not. It has been spoiled so often.] “No, I think not. It has
been spoiled so often,” he smiled.
272.30 “Bring her with you, then,” said Isabel, smiling.] “Bring her with you
then,” said Isabel promptly.
272.34 “You don’t like bringing her forward?” Isabel suggested.] “You don’t
like bringing her forward?” Isabel enquired.
273.8 “I might send her to my sister,” Mr. Osmond suggested.] “I might send
her to my sister,” Mr. Osmond observed.
273.10 with Isabel] with Miss Archer
273.11 “Yes,” said the girl] “Yes,” she concurred
273.18 “She wants me to go to Rome with her,” he announced, in a low
voice.] “She wants me to go to Rome with her,” he remarked in a low
voice.
273.21 that she assented] she assented
273.24 I am glad to hear it] I rejoice to hear it
273.36 “The girl is not disagreeable,” Osmond quietly remarked.] “The girl’s
not disagreeable,” Osmond quietly conceded.
274.6 her conversational smile] her talkative grace
274.9 the abyss into which I shall have dropped her!] the abyss into which I
shall have cast her.
274.10 Osmond gave a laugh.] He took it almost gaily.
274.13 “I shall do it,” said Osmond.] “I shall do it,” said Gilbert Osmond.
274.16 awaiting her] awaiting her guest
274.16 he had helped Madame Merle] he had helped his friend
274.29 He paid no heed to this remark, but said to Madame Merle, with a
considerable appearance of earnestness—¶“She is really very charming; I have
scarcely known any one more graceful.” ¶“I like to hear you say that.] He paid
no heed to this remark, but spoke in his own sense. “She’s really very charming.
I’ve scarcely known any one more graceful.” ¶“It does me good to hear you
say that.
274.31 She is all you said, and into the bargain she is capable of great
devotion.] She’s all you described her, and into the bargain capable, I feel, of
great devotion.
274.33 “She has too many ideas.”] “Too many ideas.”
275.3 But Osmond again detained her.] But her friend again detained her.
CHAPTER27
276.2 I shall not undertake to give an account of Isabel’s impressions of
Rome] I may not attempt to report in its fulness our young woman’s response
to the deep appeal of Rome
276.3 the ancient pavement of the Forum] the pavement of the Forum
276.5 her perception of the endless interest of the place] her impression
276.6 in a young woman of her intelligence and culture] of a person of her
freshness and her eagerness
276.10 These things excited her, but she was quietly excited.] These things
strongly moved her, but moved her all inwardly.
276.11 that she spoke less than usual] that she talked less than usual
276.13 was really dropping an eye of observation upon her] was really drop-
ping on her an intensity of observation
276.13 To her own knowledge she was very happy] By her own measure she
was very happy
276.15 to believe that these were to be on the whole the happiest hours of her
life] to take these hours for the happiest she was ever to know
276.17 The sense of the mighty human past was heavy upon her, but it was
interfused in the strangest, suddenest, most capricious way, with the fresh, cool
breath of the future.] The sense of the terrible human past was heavy to her, but
that of something altogether contemporary would suddenly give it wings that it
could wave in the blue.
276.18 Her feelings were so mingled that she scarcely knew whither any of
them would lead her] Her consciousness was so mixed that she scarcely knew
where the different parts of it would lead her
276.19 a kind of repressed ecstasy of contemplation] a repressed ecstasy of
contemplation
276.21 many of the items enumerated in “Murray.”] many of the items
enumerated in her Murray.
276.22 Rome, as Ralph said, was in capital condition.] Rome, as Ralph said,
confessed to the psychological moment.
276.26 stumbled upon] stumbled on
276.29 They had gone down from] They had descended from
277.4 deep chariot-ruts which are traceable in the antique street, and the iron
grooves which mark the course of the American horse-car] deep chariot-ruts
traceable in the antique street and the overjangled iron grooves which express
the intensity of American life
277.5 the air was filled with a golden haze] the air was a golden haze
277.6 the long shadows of broken column and formless pedestal were thrown
across] the long shadows of broken column and vague pedestal leaned across
277.8 Mr. Bantling, in whose Latin reminiscences she was apparently much
engrossed,] Mr. Bantling, whom it was apparently delightful to her to hear
speak of Julius Cæsar as a “cheeky old boy,”
277.13 digging was going on in] digging was on view in
277.15 something interesting] something of interest
277.16 who was weary with much wandering] weary with much wandering
277.17 she charged her] she admonished her
277.19 to her taste, and she should enjoy being alone] to her taste—she
should enjoy being briefly alone
277.21 She desired a quarter of an hour’s solitude] She wanted a short
solitude
277.23 scattered around her] scattered about her
277.26 objects more contemporaneous] objects charged with a more active
appeal
277.36 he stood there, smiling a little, blushing a good deal, and raising his
hat] he stood there baring his head to her perceptibly pale surprise
278.1 Isabel exclaimed, getting up] Isabel exclaimed as she rose
278.2 “I had no idea it was you,” he said.] “I had no idea it was you.
278.4 Isabel looked about her.] She looked about her to explain.
278.6 the digging over there] the work over there
278.8 Isabel had indicated] she had indicated
278.9 He stood firmly before her; he had stopped smiling; he folded his arms
with a kind of deliberation.] He stood firmly before her now; he had recovered
his balance and seemed to wish to show it, though very kindly.
278.13 and then she sat down. “But don’t let me interrupt you,] but sat down
again. “Don’t let me interrupt you,
278.23 He spoke with visible embarrassment; this unexpected meeting
caused him an emotion he was unable to conceal. He looked at Isabel a
moment, and then he said, abruptly—] He managed not to be awkward, but
he wasn’t easy, and after a longer look at the girl he came down to nature.
278.25 She looked up at him, gently.] She took it all humanely.
278.28 Isabel had taken her seat] she had taken her seat
278.33 questions, taken rather at random, and of which, as he asked some of
them] questions, taken rather at random and to which, as he put some of them
278.33 he apparently did not always heed the answer] he apparently some-
what missed catching the answer
278.36 Lord Warburton, though he tried hard to seem easy, was agitated; he
repeated] He repeated
279.4 He had abrupt alternations of gaiety and gravity; he appeared at one
moment to seek his neighbour’s eye and at the next to avoid it.] He began
abruptly to pass from the impunity of things to their solemnity, and from their
being delightful to their being impossible.
279.5 his multitudinous beard seemed to have been burnished] his multi-
tudinous beard had been burnished
279.9 with his clear grey eye, his bronzed complexion, fresh beneath its
brownness, his manly figure, his modest manner,] with his pleasant steady
eyes, his bronzed complexion, fresh beneath its seasoning, his manly figure, his
minimizing manner
279.13 she had always liked Lord Warburton] she had always liked him
279.16 He was evidently as likeable as before, and the tone of his voice, which
she had formerly thought delightful, was as good as an assurance that he would
never change for the worse.] He had kept, evidently in spite of shocks, every
one of his merits—properties these partaking of the essence of great decent
houses, as one might put it; resembling their innermost fixtures and
ornaments, not subject to vulgar shifting and removable only by some whole
break-up.
279.16 they talked about the matters that were naturally in order] they talked
of the matters naturally in order
279.19 then Lord Warburton’s own adventures] then of Lord Warburton’s
own adventures
279.22 and she knew what he was thinking of. His eyes were fixed on the
ground; but at last he raised them and said gravely—] and it said so much more
than either had said that it scarce needed his final words.
279.24 never got your letters] never had your letters
279.26 “Ah,” said Isabel with a laugh,] “Ah,” laughed Isabel,
279.28 you wouldn’t care about them] you wouldn’t care for them
279.29 a simplicity that might have touched her] a simplicity that touched her
279.32 know that I hoped] know how I hoped
279.33 Isabel stopped; it seemed to her there would be a certain flatness] But
she stopped; there would be such a flatness
280.1 Isabel found herself reduced simply to saying—“Please] She found
herself reduced simply to “Please
280.2 hardly seemed to her an improvement] hardly struck her as
improvement
280.3 Lord Warburton exclaimed] her companion exclaimed
280.6 who, as she sat there, found it good to think that she had given him the
answer] who, all still as she sat there, threw herself back with a sort of inward
triumph on the answer
280.11 of her quickened reflections] of her strange elation
280.14 And Isabel got up,] And she got up with a small conscious majesty,
280.19 in some one else] in somebody else
280.25 However, I don’t mean to trouble you now;] This instant at which I
speak to you shows me again exactly how, to my great misfortune, you just
insuperably charm me. There—I can’t say less. I don’t mean, however, to insist;
280.26 I came upon you a moment since] I came upon you a few minutes
since
280.27 I was in the very act] I was, upon my honour, in the very act
280.28 He had recovered his self-control, as I say,] He had recovered his self-
control,
280.33 He spoke plainly and simply, in a low tone of voice, in a matter-of-fact
way. There might have been something impressive, even to a woman of less
imagination than the one he addressed, in hearing this brilliant, brave-looking
gentleman express himself so modestly and reasonably.] He might have been
addressing a small committee—making all quietly and clearly a statement of
importance; aided by an occasional look at a paper of notes concealed in his
hat, which he had not again put on. And the committee, assuredly, would have
felt the point proved.
280.36 And then she added, with a smile—] And she added in a tone of which
she tried to keep up the kindness and keep down the meaning:
281.2 she asked kindly about his sisters and requested him] she was prompt
to ask about his sisters and request him
281.4 He said nothing more about his own feelings, but returned to those
more objective topics they had already touched upon. Presently he asked her]
He made for the moment no further reference to their great question, but
dipped again into shallower and safer waters. But he wished to know
281.13 Lord Warburton looked at her a moment, with an uncomfortable
smile.] His flushed smile, for a little, seemed to sound her.
281.19 said Isabel] she said
281.19 “Poor Lord Warburton,” said Isabel, a melancholy smile.] “Poor Lord
Warburton,” she said with a compassion intended to be good for both of them.
281.21 you shall not make me so] you shall not make me so
281.25 “I’ll never $...$ displease you,” he promised, very gently.] “I’ll never
$...$ displease you.”
281.28 “Perhaps $...$ you will give me leave,” he suggested.] “Perhaps $...$
you’ll give me leave.”
281.31 “I will be silent,” he said; “silent always.”] “I’ll keep it down. I’ll keep it
down always.”
282.3 Ralph Touchett gave signs of greeting to Lord Warburton, and
Henrietta exclaimed in a high voice, “Gracious, there’s that lord!” Ralph and
his friend met each other with undemonstrative cordiality, and Miss Stackpole
rested her large intellectual gaze upon the sunburnt traveller.] Poor Ralph
hailed his friend with joy qualified by wonder, and Henrietta exclaimed in a
high voice “Gracious, there’s that lord!” Ralph and his English neighbour
greeted with the austerity with which, after long separations, English neigh-
bours greet, and Miss Stackpole rested her large intellectual gaze upon the
sunburnt traveller. But she soon established her relation to the crisis.
282.4 ¶“I don’t suppose you remember me, sir,” she soon remarked.] “I don’t
suppose you remember me, sir.”
282.9 said the master of Lockleigh, good-humouredly] laughed the master of
Lockleigh
282.11 for all his good-humour] for all his hilarity
282.21 said Lord Warburton, laughing] Lord Warburton laughed again
282.22 Isabel was glad to hear him laugh; she gave a little sigh of relief as they
took their way homeward.] Isabel took pleasure in that note; she gave a small
sigh of relief as they kept their course homeward.
282.24 writing two long letters] over two long letters
282.28 going to hear vespers] going to vespers
282.33 to give Isabel an example of his intention] to give Isabel a proof of his
intention
282.33 the promise he had made] the promise made
282.35 he was both discreet and frank; he made not even a tacit appeal, but
left it for her to judge] he was both discreet and frank—not even dumbly
importunate or remotely intense. He thus left her to judge
283.2 that they offered] they offered
283.4 even by behaving heroically] even by proving the superior strain of his
sincerity
283.7 She knew already he was a good fellow, and nothing he could do would
add to this conviction. Moreover, his being in Rome at all made her vaguely
uneasy.] She knew the superior strain of everything about him, and nothing he
could now do was required to light the view. Moreover his being in Rome at all
affected her as a complication of the wrong sort—she liked so complications of
the right.
283.8 he said that he] he said he
283.9 look out for Isabel] look out for her
283.10 to reply that it would be a pleasure to see him again] to reply that he
must follow his convenience
283.18 her conception of greatness received an extension] her conception of
greatness rose and dizzily rose
283.20 and paid her silent tribute to visible grandeur] she paid tribute to the
seated sublime
283.22 she was afraid that he would end] she feared for instance that he
would end
283.27 without mutual scandal] without conflict or scandal
283.30 Henrietta was obliged to declare] Henrietta was obliged in candour to
declare
283.34 with Lord Warburton] with his lordship
283.36 borne towards them] borne to them
284.5 Isabel, above the heads of the dense group] Isabel, looking beyond the
dense group
284.7 the afternoon light $...$ sloping through] the afternoon light $...$
slope through
284.9 Lord Warburton seemed disposed to turn away again. Isabel for a
moment did the same] Lord Warburton seemed disposed to move off with
her. Isabel could only accompany him
284.12 He now approached, with a formal salutation.] He now approached
with all the forms—he appeared to have multiplied them on this occasion to
suit the place.
284.13 she said, putting out her hand] she said as she put out her hand
284.16 “The others are inside,” said Isabel.] “The others are inside,” she
decided to say.
284.18 “I didn’t come for the others,” Gilbert Osmond murmured, smiling.]
“I didn’t come for the others,” he promptly returned.
284.19 She turned away] She looked away
284.19 Lord Warburton was looking at them] Lord Warburton was watching
them
284.20 she remembered that it was just] she remembered it to be just
284.25 Isabel sought refuge from her slight agitation in mentioning to each
gentleman the name of the other] She repaired any betrayal by mentioning to
each companion the name of the other
284.26 Mr. Bantling made his way out of the choir] Mr. Bantling emerged
from the choir
284.28 for on perceiving] since on perceiving
284.32 Ralph Touchett exhibited symptoms of surprise which might not
perhaps have seemed flattering to Mr. Osmond. It must be added, however,
that these manifestations were momentary, and Ralph was presently able to say
to his cousin, with due jocularity] Ralph Touchett appeared to take the case as
not committing him to joy. He didn’t hang back, however, from civility, and
presently observed to Isabel, with due benevolence
284.35 His greeting to Mr. Osmond was apparently frank; that is, the two
men shook hands and looked at each other. Miss Stackpole had met the
new-comer in Florence] Miss Stackpole had met Mr. Osmond in Florence
285.1 she liked him no better than $...$ Lord Warburton, and little Mr.
Rosier] she liked him no better than $...$ and Lord Warburton, and even
than little Mr. Rosier
285.3 most unpleasant people] most unnatural people
285.7 “What’s your opinion of St. Peter’s?” Mr. Osmond asked of Isabel.
¶“It’s very large and very bright,” said the girl.] “What’s your opinion of
St. Peter’s?” Mr. Osmond was meanwhile enquiring of our young lady. ¶“It’s
very large and very bright,” she contented herself with replying.
285.10 “Is not that the right way to feel—in a church?” Isabel asked, with a
faint but interested smile.] “Isn’t that the right way to feel in the greatest of
human temples?” she asked with rather a liking for her phrase.
285.14 had said to her in Florence] had referred to in Florence
285.19 ¶“Who is the gentleman speaking to Miss Archer?” his lordship
inquired.] “Who’s the fellow speaking to Miss Archer?” his lordship
demanded.
285.25 “No, about a fortnight.”] “Three or four weeks.”
286.6 “Yes, I think she does.” ¶“Is he a good fellow?” ¶Ralph hesitated a
moment. “No, he’s not,” he said, at last. ¶“Why then does she like him?”
pursued Lord Warburton, with noble naïveté. ¶“Because she’s a woman.”
¶Lord Warburton was silent a moment. “There are other men who are good
ellows,” he presently said, “and them—and them——” ¶“And them she likes
also!” Ralph interrupted, smiling. ¶“Oh, if you mean she likes him in that way!”
And Lord Warburton turned round again. As far as he was concerned, how-
ever, the party was broken up. Isabel remained in conversation with the
gentleman from Florence till they left the church, and her English lover
consoled himself by lending such attention as he might to the strains which
continued to proceed from the choir.] “She’s trying to find out.” ¶“And will
she?” ¶“Find out—?” Ralph asked. ¶“Will she like him?” ¶“Do you mean will
she accept him?” ¶“Yes,” said Lord Warburton after an instant; “I suppose
that’s what I horribly mean.” ¶“Perhaps not if one does nothing to prevent it,”
Ralph replied. ¶His lordship stared a moment, but apprehended. “Then we
must be perfectly quiet?” ¶“As quiet as the grave. And only on the chance!”
Ralph added. ¶“The chance she may?” ¶“The chance she may not?” ¶Lord
Warburton took this at first in silence, but he spoke again. “Is he awfully
clever?” ¶“Awfully,” said Ralph. ¶His companion thought. “And what else?”
¶“What more do you want?” Ralph groaned. ¶“Do you mean what more does
she?” ¶Ralph took him by the arm to turn him: they had to rejoin the others.
“She wants nothing that we can give her.” ¶“Ah well, if she won’t have You—!”
said his lordship handsomely as they went.
CHAPTER28
287.5 a visit in their box, in accordance with the time-honoured Italian
custom; and after he had obtained his admittance] a visit in their box after
the easy Italian fashion; and when he had obtained his admittance
287.14 Warburton supposed that their companions had taken advantage of
the entracte] Warburton supposed their companions had taken advantage of
the recess
287.16 watching the interesting pair in the box, and asking himself whether
he should go up and interrupt their harmonious colloquy] with his eyes on the
interesting pair; he asked himself if he should go up and interrupt the harmony
287.17 it became apparent that Isabel had seen him] he judged that Isabel had
seen him
287.18 He took his way to the upper regions,] There should be no marked
holding off. He took his way to the upper regions
287.19 the attitude of ennui] the inclination of ennui
287.22 Ralph remarked] was Ralph’s greeting
287.23 that you have deserted] which you’ve yet deserted
287.24 she has got a visitor] she has a visitor
287.26 I didn’t think they wanted me either.] I didn’t think they wanted me
either.
288.2 the same low-voiced mock-melancholy] the same large mock-
melancholy
288.6 where he received a very gracious welcome from the more attractive
of its occupants] where Isabel’s welcome was as to a friend so honourably old
that he vaguely asked himself what queer temporal province she was
annexing
288.11 sat very quietly, scarcely mingling in the somewhat disjointed talk in
which Lord Warburton engaged with Isabel. It seemed to the latter gentleman
that Miss Archer looked very pretty; he even thought she looked excited] sat
blandly apart and silent, as if repudiating competence in the subjects of
allusion now probable. It struck her second visitor that Miss Archer had, in
operatic conditions, a radiance, even a slight exaltation
288.13 betrayed little agitation;] moreover pointed to presence of mind
288.18 to have such soft, reassuring tones in her voice?] with such arts and
such felicities, above all with such tones of reparation—preparation? Her voice
had tricks of sweetness, but why play them on him?
288.20 for Lord Warburton to remain] for him to remain
288.20 a little behind, in the dark] a little behind and in the dark
288.21 Mr. Osmond sat in front] Mr. Osmond remained in front
288.22 with his elbows on his knees] his elbows on his knees
288.26 Lord Warburton remained in his corner] Lord Warburton kept his
corner
288.29 and then he was puzzled again. Why had she so sweet a voice—such a
friendly accent?] but it didn’t prevent his being puzzled again. Why should she
mark so one of his values—quite the wrong one—when she would have
nothing to do with another, which was quite the right?
288.32 tragical streets of Rome] tragic streets of Rome
288.35 after the visitor had gone] after he had retired
289.4 the ownership of human beings] the ownership of wretched human
beings
289.5 he owns his tenants, and he has thousands] he owns his tenants and has
thousands
289.18 talking to you over a fence!] talking to you over something with a neat
top-finish of broken glass.
289.24 “Well enough.” ¶“Do you like him?” ¶“Very much.” ¶“Is he a man of
ability?”] “Well enough for all the use I have for him.” ¶“And how much of a
use is that?” ¶“Well, I like to like him.” ¶“‘Liking to like’—why, it makes a
passion!” said Osmond. ¶“No”—she considered—“keep that for liking to dis-
like.” ¶“Do you wish to provoke me then,” Osmond laughed, “to a passion for
him?” ¶She said nothing for a moment, but then met the light question with a
disproportionate gravity. “No, Mr. Osmond; I don’t think I should ever dare to
provoke you. Lord Warburton, at any rate,” she more easily added, “is a very
nice man.” ¶“Of great ability?” her friend enquired.
289.29 to enjoy your favour!] to enjoy your high favour!
289.30 Isabel gave a serious smile.] Isabel considered him with interest.
289.34 “My envy is not dangerous; it is very platonic. Why do you call him
poor?”] “My envy’s not dangerous; it wouldn’t hurt a mouse. I don’t want to
destroy the people—I only want to be them. You see it would destroy only
myself.” ¶“You’d like to be the Pope?” said Isabel. ¶“I should love it—but I
should have gone in for it earlier. But why”—Osmond reverted—“do you
speak of your friend as poor?”
289.35 Women usually pity men] Women—when they are very, very good—
sometimes pity men
290.1 for the first time, with a cynicism] for the first time and with a
cynicism
290.4 as if the idea were perfectly novel] as if the idea were perfectly fresh
290.9 where he was standing] where he stood
290.12 Gilbert Osmond was numbered] Gilbert Osmond had his place
290.14 Lord Warburton spoke to her with all his usual geniality,] Lord
Warburton addressed her alertly enough,
290.17 “I should bid you good-bye.” ¶I shall not undertake to explain why,
but Isabel was sorry to hear it. It was, perhaps, because she had ceased to be
afraid] “I must bid you good-bye.” Isabel, inconsequently enough, was now
sorry to hear it. This was perhaps because she had ceased to be afraid
290.19 saying she was sorry] naming her regret
290.20 a happy journey.] a happy journey; which made him look at her
rather unlightedly.
290.21 He looked at her with a somewhat heavy eye.] omitted
290.23 “I am afraid you think me rather inconsistent,” he said. “I told you the
other day that I wanted so much to stay a while.”] “I’m afraid you’ll think me
very ‘volatile.’ I told you the other day I wanted so much to stop.”
290.28 said his lordship, rather dismally] said his lordship quite dismally
290.31 Isabel looked at him for a moment.] Isabel looked at him a
moment.
291.1 Isabel hesitated, and then,] Isabel hesitated, but soon,
291.4 “That will do as well,” said Isabel, smiling.] “That will do as well,” she
smiled.
291.6 the beautiful room] the glorious room
291.8 in the middle of the circle of statues, looking at them vaguely] in the
centre of the circle of these presences, regarding them vaguely
291.13 feeling the effect of their noble quietude. It soothes and moderates the
spirit, it purifies the imagination.] feeling the effect of their noble quietude;
which, as with a high door closed for the ceremony, slowly drops on the spirit
the large white mantle of peace.
291.15 the great stillness of the past] the deep stillness of the past
291.19 more perfectly human] more mildly human
291.21 seeing life between their gazing eyelids and purpose in their marble
lips] wondering to what, of their experience, their absent eyes were open, and
how, to our ears, their alien lips would sound
291.27 she was glad, for the time, to be alone. At the last her thoughts
wandered away from them, solicited by images of a vitality more complete.
An occasional tourist came into the room,] she was glad again, for the time, to
be alone. At last, however, her attention lapsed, drawn off by a deeper tide of
life. An occasional tourist came in,
291.30 He strolled towards her slowly] He strolled toward her slowly
291.32 and with his usual bright, inquiring, yet not appealing smile] and his
usual enquiring, yet not quite appealing smile
291.34 “I am surprised to find you alone,” he said. “I thought you had
company.”] “I’m surprised to find you alone, I thought you had
company.”
291.35 And Isabel glanced at the circle of sculpture.] And she glanced at the
Antinous and the Faun.
291.36 Do you call this better company] Do you call them better company
292.2 my English peer left me some time ago,” said Isabel, getting up. She
spoke, with intention,] my English peer left me some time ago.” She got up,
speaking with intention
292.4 but it did not prevent him from giving a laugh] which contributed for
him to the interest of his question
292.12 “That’s exactly what I mean!” Gilbert Osmond exclaimed, so humor-
ously that his joke needs to be explained. ¶We knew that he was fond of
originals, of rarities, of the superior, the exquisite] “That’s exactly what I
mean!” Gilbert Osmond returned, and with such happy hilarity that his joke
needs to be explained. We know that he was fond of originals, of rarities, of the
superior and the exquisite
292.16 by rejecting the splendid offer of a British aristocrat] by declining so
noble a hand
292.18 the British aristocracy—he had never forgiven Providence for not
making him an English duke—and could measure the unexpectedness of this
conduct.] this particular patriciate; not so much for its distinction, which he
thought easily surpassable, as for its solid actuality. He had never forgiven his
star for not appointing him to an English dukedom, and he could measure the
unexpectedness of such conduct as Isabel’s.
292.19 the woman he should marry] the woman he might marry
CHAPTER29
293.3 Ralph Touchett, for reasons best known to himself, had seen fit to say
that Gilbert Osmond was not a good fellow; but this assertion was not borne
out by the gentleman’s conduct] Ralph Touchett, in talk with his excellent
friend, had rather markedly qualified, as we know, his recognition of Gilbert
Osmond’s personal merits; but he might really have felt himself illiberal in the
light of that gentleman’s conduct
293.4 He spent a portion] Osmond spent a portion
293.5 gave every indication of being an easy man to live with] ended by
affecting them as the easiest of men to live with
293.12 It was impossible not to feel that he had excellent points, and indeed
this is perhaps why Ralph Touchett made his want of good fellowship a
reproach to him. Even Ralph was obliged to admit that just now he was a
delightful companion. His good humour was imperturbable, his knowledge
universal, his manners were the gentlest in the world. His spirits were not
visibly high; it was difficult to think of Gilbert Osmond as boisterous; he had a
mortal dislike to loudness or eagerness.] Who wouldn’t have seen that he
could command, as it were, both tact and gaiety?—which perhaps was exactly
why Ralph had made his old-time look of superficial sociability a reproach to
him. Even Isabel’s invidious kinsman was obliged to admit that he was just
now a delightful associate. His good-humour was imperturbable, his knowl-
edge of the right fact, his production of the right word, as convenient as the
friendly flicker of a match for your cigarette. Clearly he was amused—as
amused as a man could be who was so little ever surprised, and that made him
almost applausive. It was not that his spirits were visibly high—he would
never, in the concert of pleasure, touch the big drum by so much as a knuckle:
he had a mortal dislike to the high, ragged note, to what he called random
ravings.
293.13 sometimes too eager, too pronounced] sometimes of too precipitate a
readiness
293.13 It was a pity] It was pity
293.15 as bright and soft as an April cloud] as smooth to his general need of
her as handled ivory to the palm
293.15 If Osmond was not loud] If he was not personally loud
293.16 he had a gaiety] he knew a complacency
293.24 the pleasant occasions of life] the occasions of life
293.27 In general Osmond took his pleasures singly; he was usually disgusted
with something that seemed to him ugly or offensive; his mind was rarely
visited with moods of comprehensive satisfaction.] ¶He took his pleasures in
general singly; he was too often—he would have admitted that—too sorely
aware of something wrong, something ugly; the fertilising dew of a conceivable
felicity too seldom descended on his spirit.
293.31 he had never been spoiled;] he had the irritation of satiety,
294.2 he used to repeat to himself] he used inwardly to repeat
294.3 I shall have earned it well] I shall thoroughly have earned it
294.5 Absolutely void of success his career had not been; a very moderate
amount of reflection would have assured him of this.] He was too apt to reason
as if “earning” this boon consisted above all of covertly aching for it and might
be confined to that exercise. Absolutely void of it, also, his career had not been;
he might indeed have suggested to a spectator here and there that he was
resting on vague laurels.
294.6 less difficult] less arduous
294.7 but it had been easy—that is, it had been rapid] but had been easy—
that is had been rapid
294.9 he had believed it was in him] he had believed it in him
294.10 to succeed greatly—in something or other—] to have something or
other to show for his “parts”—to show somehow or other
296.16 the conditions attached to success became so various and repulsive
that the idea of making an effort gradually lost its charm. It was not dead,
however; it only slept; it revived after he had made the acquaintance of Isabel
Archer. Osmond had felt that any enterprise in which the chance of failure was
at all considerable would never have an attraction for him; to fail would have
been unspeakably odious, would have left an ineffaceable stain upon his life.
Success was to seem in advance definitely certain—certain, that is, on this one
condition, that the effort should be an agreeable one to make. That of exciting
an interest on the part of Isabel Archer corresponded to this description, for
the girl had pleased him from the first of his seeing her. We have seen that she
thought him “fine”; and Gilbert Osmond returned the compliment. We have
also seen (or heard) that he had a great dread of vulgarity, and on this score his
mind was at rest with regard to our young lady. He was not afraid that she
would disgust him or irritate him; he had no fear that she would even, in the
more special sense of the word, displease him. If she was too eager, she could be
taught to be less so; that was a fault which diminished with growing knowledge.
She might defy him, she might anger him; this was another matter from
displeasing him, and on the whole a less serious one. If a woman were
ungraceful and common, her whole quality was vitiated, and one could take no
precautions against that; one’s own delicacy would avail little. If, however, she
were only wilful and high-tempered, the defect might be managed with
comparative ease; for had one not a will of one’s own that one had been
keeping for years in the best condition—as pure and keen as a sword protected
by its sheath? ¶Though I have tried to speak with extreme discretion, the reader
may have gathered a suspicion that Gilbert Osmond was not untainted by
selfishness. This is rather a coarse imputation to put upon a man of his
refinement; and it behoves us at all times to remember the familiar proverb
about those who live in glass houses. If Mr. Osmond was more selfish than
most of his fellows, the fact will still establish itself. Lest it should fail to do so, I
must decline to commit myself to an accusation so gross; the more especially as
several of the items of our story would seem to point the other way. It is well
known that there are few indications of selfishness more conclusive (on the
part of a gentleman at least) than the preference for a single life. Gilbert
Osmond, after having tasted of matrimony, had spent a succession of years
in the full enjoyment of recovered singleness. He was familiar with the
simplicity of purpose, the lonely liberties, of bachelorhood. He had reached
that period of life when it is supposed to be doubly difficult to renounce these
liberties, endeared as they are by long association; and yet he was prepared to
make the generous sacrifice. It would seem that this might fairly be set down to
the credit of the noblest of our qualities—the faculty of self-devotion. Certain it
is that Osmond’s desire to marry had been deep and distinct. It had not been
notorious; he had not gone about asking people whether they knew a nice girl
with a little money. Money was an object; but this was not his manner of
proceeding, and no one knew—or even greatly cared—whether he wished to
marry or not. Madame Merle knew—that we have already perceived. It was not
that he had told her; on the whole he would not have cared to tell her. But there
were things of which she had no need to be told—things as to which she had a
sort of creative intuition. She had recognised a truth that was none the less
pertinent for being very subtle: the truth that there was something very
imperfect in Osmond’s situation as it stood. He was a failure, of course; that
was an old story; to Madame Merle’s perception he would always be a failure.
But there were degrees of ineffectiveness, and there was no need of taking one
of the highest. Success, for Gilbert Osmond, would be to make himself felt; that
was the only success to which he could now pretend. It is not a kind of
distinction that is officially recognised—unless indeed the operation be per-
formed upon multitudes of men. Osmond’s line would be to impress himself
not largely but deeply; a distinction of the most private sort. A single character
might offer the whole measure of it; the clear and sensitive nature of a generous
girl would make space for the record. The record of course would be complete
if the young lady should have a fortune, and Madame Merle would have taken
no pains to make Mr. Osmond acquainted with Mrs. Touchett’s niece if Isabel
had been as scantily dowered as when first she met her. He had waited all these
years because he wanted only the best, and a portionless bride naturally would
not have been the best. He had waited so long in vain that he finally almost lost
his interest in the subject—not having kept it up by venturesome experiments.
It had become improbable that the best was now to be had, and if he wished to
make himself felt, there was soft and supple little Pansy, who would evidently
respond to the slightest pressure. When at last the best did present itself
Osmond recognised it like a gentleman. There was therefore no incongruity
in his wishing to marry—it was his own idea of success, as well as that which
Madame Merle, with her old-time interest in his affairs, entertained for him.
Let it not, however, be supposed that he was guilty of the error of believing that
Isabel’s character was of that passive sort which offers a free field for domina-
tion. He was sure that she would constantly act—act in the sense of enthusiastic
concession.] the conditions attached to any marked proof of rarity had affected
him more and more as gross and detestable; like the swallowing of mugs of
beer to advertise what one could “stand.” If an anonymous drawing on a
museum wall had been conscious and watchful it might have known this
peculiar pleasure of being at last and all of a sudden identified—as from the
hand of a great master—by the so high and so unnoticed fact of style. His
“style” was what the girl had discovered with a little help; and now, beside
herself enjoying it, she should publish it to the world without his having any of
the trouble. She should do the thing for him, and he would not have waited in
vain.
296.18 the time which had been fixed in advance for her return to Florence,]the
time fixed in advance for her departure
296.19 a telegram which ran as follows:—“Leave Florence 4th June,
Bellaggio] a telegram running as follows: “Leave Florence 4th June for
Bellaggio
296.22 no other views, and she wrote to her aunt that] different views, and
she let her aunt know
296.25 among the Seven Hills] in the cool shadow of Saint Peter’s
296.25 He should not return] He would not return
296.26 It might be long] It might be months
296.27 This conversation] This exchange
296.28 sitting-room which our friends occupied] sitting-room occupied by
our friends
296.33 Miss Stackpole contracted friendships] Henrietta contracted
friendships
296.34 several in railway-carriages, which were among] in railway-carriages
several that were among
297.5 To Osmond the place was painfully ugly; $...$ made him suffer.]
For Osmond the place was ugly to distress; $...$ were like vulgar, brag-
ging, lying talk.
297.8 to go on with her reading] to pursue her study
297.17 Don’t put us into a parenthesis] Don’t put us in a parenthesis
297.21 the pages of M. Ampère a little] the pages of M. Ampère
297.23 she said at last.] omitted
297.26 Isabel went on] She went on
297.36 with your own life] with your own
298.1 Isabel looked up] She looked up
298.2 is bad art] is bad, is stupid art
298.3 yours seems to me very good] yours seem to me very clear and very
good
298.5 Isabel continued] she went on
298.7 the tone of their conversation was not jocular] the tone of their
conversation was not jocose
298.8 Isabel was almost tremulously serious; he had seen her so before.]
Isabel had in fact her solemnity; he had seen it before.
298.15 what put it into your head] what has put it into your head
298.20 “The more reason why you should travel and learn,” said Osmond,
smiling.] “The more reason why you should travel and learn,” smiled Osmond.
298.20 “Besides,” he added, more gravely,] “Besides,” he added as if it were a
point to be made,
298.23 to qualify her little visit to Rome—was coming to an end] to qualify
these too few days in Rome, which she might musingly have likened to the
figure of some small princess of one of the ages of dress overmuffled in a
mantle of state and dragging a train that it took pages or historians to hold
up—that this felicity was coming to an end
298.24 the interest of this episode] the interest of the time
298.24 —this reflection] was a reflexion
298.27 if there were a danger that they should not meet again] if there were a
danger they should never meet again
298.29 and these few days had been interfused with the element of success]
and her adventure wore already the changed, the seaward face of some
romantic island from which, after feasting on purple grapes, she was putting
off while the breeze rose
298.33 the greater was the pity that this happy week was over; for a moment
she felt her heart throb with a kind of delicious pain] the greater the pity that
the chapter was closed; she felt for a moment a pang that touched the source of
tears
299.2 “Doing what you like.”] “Well, doing what you like.”
299.3 Doing what we like] Doing all the vain things one likes
299.5 “Exactly,” said Osmond, with his quick responsiveness.] “Exactly,” said
Osmond with his quiet quickness.
299.8 something I wish to say] something I want to say
299.12 you are never disagreeable] you’re never ‘cross’
299.16 Osmond spoke very simply—almost solemnly. “There must be some-
thing very noble about that.”] Osmond spoke with a noble earnestness. “They
must be great moments to see.”
299.17 “If I could only find it now!” the girl exclaimed, laughing, yet frown-
ing.] “If I could only find it now!” Isabel nervously cried.
299.20 He was leaning forward, with a hand on each knee] He leaned
forward, a hand on each knee
299.24 Isabel instantly rose from her chair. ¶“Ah, keep that till I am tired!”
she murmured.] She instantly rose. “Ah, keep that till I am tired!”
299.26 And Osmond sat there, looking up at her.] He sat there raising his
eyes to her.
299.29 The two remained a moment] The two remained a while
299.33 ¶“I am thoroughly in love with you.”] “I’m absolutely in love
with you.”
299.36 for his own relief] for his own needed relief
300.3 The tears came into Isabel’s eyes—they were caused by an intenser
throb of that pleasant pain I spoke of a moment ago. There was an immense
sweetness in the words he had uttered;] The tears came into her eyes: this time
they obeyed the sharpness of the pang that suggested to her somehow the
slipping of a fine bolt—backward, forward, she couldn’t have said which. The
words he had uttered made him, as he stood there, beautiful and generous,
invested him as with the golden air of early autumn;
300.5 she had retreated in two or three cases that we know of in which the
same words had been spoken] she had retreated in the other cases before a like
encounter
300.7 she answered at last, in a tone of entreaty which had nothing of
conventional modesty, but which expressed] she answered with an intensity
that expressed
300.11 the consciousness of what was in her own heart. It was terrible to have
to surrender herself to that.] the sense of something within herself, deep down,
that she supposed to be inspired and trustful passion. It was there like a large
sum stored in a bank—which there was a terror in having to begin to spend. If
she touched it, it would all come out.
300.17 bending forward a little] considerately inclined to her
300.20 his keen, expressive, emphatic face] his firm, refined, slightly ravaged
face
300.24 and thought that she filled it] thinking she filled it
300.25 an expression of this complacency] an expression of any such
complacency
300.28 and thought it a ridiculous word. But it was the word that came to her.]
and it struck her as a ridiculous word. But it was what stupidly came to her.
301.1 “I don’t know you,” said Isabel, abruptly] “I don’t at all know you,” she
added abruptly
301.7 “No, no,” said the girl, with a flash of bright eagerness;] “No, no,” she
emphatically answered—
301.9 “Well,” Osmond answered, with a laugh,] “Well,” he laughed,
301.10 That may be a boast] It may be a boast
301.16 taking the hand which she failed to surrender to him. And then in a
moment he added,] taking the hand which she failed to surrender. After which
he added:
301.21 he said] DELETION
301.27 Osmond for a moment] Osmond
301.28 that would match these words. But he changed his mind,] that would
match these words, but he changed his mind
301.29 it’s proper you should go with her, all the same] it’s proper you should
go with her, very proper
301.33 “You are not conventional?” said Isabel, very gravely.] “You’re not
conventional?” Isabel gravely asked.
301.36 And Osmond paused a moment] And he paused a moment
302.1 “Do come back again!” he cried.] “Do come back again,” he pleaded.
302.3 Isabel stood there] She stood there
302.6 who hasn’t my ideas] who hasn’t at all my ideas
302.11 and then she seated herself, slowly,] and seated herself slowly
302.14 That which had happened] What had happened
302.16 her imagination halted] that sublime principle somehow broke
down
302.19 Her imagination stopped, as I say;] Her imagination, as I say, now
hung back:
CHAPTER30
303.1 Under her cousin’s escort Isabel returned on the morrow to Florence,] She
returned on the morrow to Florence, under her cousin’s
escort,
303.2 though usually he was not fond of railway journeys,] though usually
restive under railway discipline,
303.3 the train which hurried] the train that hurried
303.7 to be executed with Mr. Bantling’s assistance] to be carried out with
Mr. Bantling’s aid
303.8 Isabel was to have but three days in Florence] Isabel was to have three
days in Florence
303.10 her promise to go and see Pansy] her promise to call on Pansy
303.11 a plan of Madame Merle’s] an idea of Madame Merle’s
303.19 ¶She mentioned to Madame Merle that Mr. Osmond had asked her to
call upon his daughter; she did not mention to her that] She mentioned to this
fortunate woman that Mr. Osmond had asked her to take a look at his
daughter, but didn’t mention that
303.21 “Ah, comme cela se trouve!” the elder lady exclaimed.] “Ah, comme cela
se trouve!” Madame Merle exclaimed.
303.23 a kindness to take a look at the child before I go into the country] a
kindness to pay the child a little visit before I go off
303.24 “We can go together, then,” said Isabel, reasonably. I say “reason-
ably,”] “We can go together then,” Isabel reasonably said: “reasonably”
303.26 her visit] her small pilgrimage
303.30 Nevertheless, to her great consideration for Madame Merle she was
prepared to sacrifice this mystic sentiment. ¶Her friend meditated, with her
usual suggestive smile. “After all,” she presently said,] She was nevertheless
prepared to sacrifice this mystic sentiment to her great consideration for her
friend. ¶That personage finely meditated. “After all,
304.7 it doesn’t matter] it doesn’t signify
304.12 “How much you think of your promises!” said Madame Merle, with a
smile of genial mockery.] “How much you think of your promises!” said the
elder woman in mild mockery.
304.14 “You are right,” Madame Merle reflected audibly] “You’re right,”
Madame Merle audibly reflected
304.19 Madame Merle added—“don’t tell her; she won’t care.”] Madame
Merle added, “don’t tell her. She won’t care.”
304.21 the charming winding way] the winding way
304.22 what Madame Merle had meant by no one being the wiser] what her
friend had meant by no one’s being the wiser
304.24 this lady, in whose discretion, as a general thing, there was something
almost brilliant,] this lady, whose voyaging discretion, as a general thing, was
rather of the open sea than of the risky channel,
304.27 she was capable of doing a deed in secret] she was capable of doing a
thing at all if it had to be sneakingly done
304.30 there were certain things] there were sorts of things
304.31 in another apartment,] in another place
304.33 that she performed this duty faithfully] she performed this duty with
rigour
304.34 Presently Pansy came in] She immediately came in
304.35 with the wide-eyed conscientiousness of a sensitive child] with a
wide-eyed earnestness of courtesy
305.1 Pansy entertained her like a little lady] Pansy rose to the occasion as the
small, winged fairy in the pantomime soars by the aid of the dissimulated wire
305.2 the same courteous interest] showing the same respectful interest
305.4 as I have said before, she had never seen a child like that. How well she
had been taught, said our keen young lady,] she had never had so directly
presented to her nose the white flower of cultivated sweetness. How well the
child had been taught, said our admiring young woman;
305.9 how innocent she has been kept! Isabel was fond of psychological
problems, and it had pleased her, up to this time, to be in doubt as to whether
Miss Pansy were not all-knowing. Was her infantine serenity but the perfection
of self-consciousness?] how innocent she had been kept! Isabel was fond, ever,
of the question of character and quality, of sounding, as who should say, the
deep personal mystery, and it had pleased her, up to this time, to be in doubt as
to whether this tender slip were not really all-knowing. Was the extremity of
her candour but the perfection of self-consciousness?
305.10 a little neat, orderly character] an unspotted nature
305.14 rich-looking gloom] rich gloom
305.14 Isabel’s interview] her interview
305.19 Pansy was really a blank page, a pure white surface; she was not clever
enough for precocious coquetries. She was not clever; Isabel could see that; she
only had nice feelings. There was something touching about her; Isabel had felt
it before; she would be an easy victim of fate.] Pansy was really a blank page, a
pure white surface, successfully kept so; she had neither art, nor guile, nor
temper, nor talent—only two or three small exquisite instincts: for knowing a
friend, for avoiding a mistake, for taking care of an old toy or a new frock. Yet
to be so tender was to be touching withal, and she could be felt as an easy victim
of fate.
305.22 only an exquisite taste, and an appreciation, equally exquisite, of such
affection as might be bestowed upon her.] omitted
305.23 She would easily be mystified, easily crushed; her force would be solely
in her power to cling.] she would easily be mystified, easily crushed: her force
would be all in knowing when and where to cling.
305.24 with Isabel,] with her visitor,
305.26 She talked about her prospects] She spoke of her prospects
305.28 giving Isabel the information that so observant a visitor would natu-
rally expect] of supplying the information so distinguished a guest would
naturally expect
306.1 I have got no memory] I have no memory
306.8 to keep the money, to marry me] to keep the money—to marry me
306.15 I am very sorry for that.] I’m very sorry, and he’ll be sorry too.
306.18 for I am as yet only a child] for I’m really as yet only a child
306.19 When did you give them up] When did you give them up
306.29 I wish very much that you would play] I wish very much you’d play
306.30 papa wishes very much] papa has the idea
306.32 And I have no voice—just a little thread.] And I’ve no voice—just a
small sound like the squeak of a slate-pencil making flourishes.
307.1 she kissed the child good-bye, and held her a moment, looking at her.
¶“Be a good child,” she said;] she kissed the child good-bye, held her close,
looked at her long. “Be very good,” she said;
307.5 an interest which she felt it almost a torment to be obliged to conceal]
an interest which she felt it to be almost a torment that she was obliged to
conceal from the child
307.13 and of leaving an audible trace of her emotion behind] and of exhaling
into that air where he might still have a subtle sense for it any breath of her
charmed state
307.14 she had stayed only an hour!] she had stayed only an hour.
307.16 drawing the child’s little tender person closer,] drawing the child’s
sweet slimness closer
307.18 talking about Gilbert Osmond] talking of Gilbert Osmond
307.19 who was near to him] who was so near him
307.20 she said not another word; she only kissed Pansy once more] she said
no other word; she only kissed Pansy once again
307.21 the door which opened into the court; and there Pansy stopped] the
door that opened on the court; and there her young hostess stopped
307.24 ¶“I may go no further,” she said. “I have promised papa not to go out
of this door.”] “I may go no further. I’ve promised papa not to pass this door.”
307.33 a wider gleam as it opened] a wider dazzle as it opened
CHAPTER31
308.5 her return to the Palazzo Crescentini,] her return to Palazzo
Crescentini
308.5 the incidents I have just narrated] the incidents just narrated
308.15 Our young lady stood for some time at the window, with her hands
clasped behind her, gazing into the brilliant aperture in the manner of a person
relapsing into reverie. She was pre-occupied; she was too restless to sit down, to
work, to read. It was evidently not her design, however, to catch a glimpse] Our
young woman stood near it for some time, her hands clasped behind her; she
gazed abroad with the vagueness of unrest. Too troubled for attention she
moved in a vain circle. Yet it could not be in her thought to catch a glimpse
308.16 into the house; for the entrance] into the house, since the entrance
308.18 She was endeavouring rather to anticipate his arrival] She wished
rather to forestall his arrival
308.26 She was extremely grave; not sad exactly, but deeply serious. The lapse
of a year may doubtless account for a considerable increase of gravity; though
this will depend a good deal upon the manner in which the year has been spent.
Isabel had spent hers in seeing the world; she had moved about; she had
travelled; she had exerted herself with an almost passionate activity. She was
now, to her own sense, a very different person] Grave she found herself, and
positively more weighted, as by the experience of the lapse of the year she had
spent in seeing the world. She had ranged, she would have said, through space
and surveyed much of mankind, and was therefore now, in her own eyes, a very
different person
308.27 who had begun to see Europe upon the lawn] who had begun to take
the measure of Europe on the lawn
308.29 She flattered herself that she had gathered a rich experience, that she
knew a great deal more] She flattered herself she had harvested wisdom and
learned a great deal more
309.4 With several of the figures concerned in these combinations] With
several of the images that might have been projected on such a field
309.6 who came out] who had come out
309.7 with Isabel. She left her husband behind her, but she brought her
children] with her relative. She had left her husband behind her, but had
brought her children
309.14 Isabel confined her movements] Isabel had confined her movements
309.18 a resting-place in such upward wanderings] a resting-place for such
upward wanderings
309.24 Afterwards they had come to Paris, a city beloved by Lily, but less
appreciated by Isabel, who in those days was constantly thinking of Rome.
Mrs. Ludlow enjoyed Paris, but she was nevertheless somewhat disappointed
and puzzled; and after her husband had joined her she was in addition a good
deal depressed at not being able to induce him to enter into these somewhat
subtle and complex emotions.] They had afterwards reached the French
capital, which was worshipped, and with costly ceremonies, by Lily, but
thought of as noisily vacant by Isabel, who in these days made use of her
memory of Rome as she might have done, in a hot and crowded room, of a
phial of something pungent hidden in her handkerchief. ¶Mrs. Ludlow sacri-
ficed, as I say, to Paris, yet had doubts and wonderments not allayed at that
altar; and after her husband had joined her found further chagrin in his failure
to throw himself into these speculations.
309.25 They all had Isabel for their object] They all had Isabel for subject
309.27 Mrs. Ludlow’s feelings were various.] Mrs. Ludlow’s mental motions
were sufficiently various.
309.28 for Isabel to come home] for that young woman to come home
309.32 not marrying some gentleman of rank in one of the foreign countries]
not marrying some member of one of the great aristocracies
309.33 she was rather disappointed] she had fallen from high communion
with the probabilities
309.36 her sister’s slender but eminent figure] her sister’s slightly meagre, but
scarce the less eminent figure
310.9 any privilege that she enjoyed] any privilege she enjoyed
310.14 she had not made these honourable victories public] she had not
rendered these honourable victories public
310.20 It entertained her more to say nothing, and she had no idea of asking
poor Lily’s advice. But Lily knew nothing of these rich mysteries, and it is no
wonder, therefore, that she pronounced her sister’s career in Europe rather
dull—] It was more romantic to say nothing, and, drinking deep, in secret, of
romance, she was as little disposed to ask poor Lily’s advice as she would have
been to close that rare volume forever. But Lily knew nothing of these
discriminations, and could only pronounce her sister’s career a strange anti-
climax—
310.23 her sister was really losing her gaiety] she had lost her courage
310.24 So very strange a result] So uncanny a result
310.29 Isabel’s gaiety, however—superficially speaking, at least—exhibited
itself rather more after her sister had gone home. She could imagine something
more poetic than spending the winter in Paris] Our young lady’s courage,
however, might have been taken as reaching its height after her relations had
gone home. She could imagine braver things than spending the winter in Paris
310.30 Paris was like smart, neat prose] Paris had sides by which it so
resembled New York, Paris was like smart, neat prose
310.31 her frequent correspondence with Madame Merle did much to stimu-
late such fancies] her close correspondence with Madame Merle did much to
stimulate such flights
310.34 the latter days of November] the last days of November
310.34 the train which was to convey poor Lily] the train that was to convey
poor Lily
310.36 It had been good for her to have them with her] It had been good for
her to regale
311.12 There was something exciting in the feeling,] There was a deep thrill
in it all,
311.15 our young lady was unattended] our heroine was unattended
311.31 a fresher field for her talents] a fresher field for her genius
311.33 he would soon come over and see her] he would soon come over to see
her
311.34 to apologise for not coming just then to Florence] to apologise for not
presenting herself just yet in Florence
311.36 of no more use than soap-bubbles] of no more use to her than bubbles
312.2 what one would have done] what one “would” have done
312.4 it was not so frank as it seemed] not so frank as it pretended
312.6 she thought it was a sign that there was nothing going on with Gilbert
Osmond] she took it for a sign that Gilbert Osmond was less in question there
than formerly
312.8 to see whether Mr. Osmond would now go to Rome, and took some
comfort in learning that he was not guilty of an absence] to see if he would now
find a pretext for going to Rome, and derived some comfort from learning that
he had not been guilty of an absence
312.17 her restlessness prevailed] a certain incoherence prevailed in her
312.18 Isabel travelled rapidly, eagerly, audaciously] Isabel travelled rapidly
and recklessly
312.19 Madame Merle, for the present, was a most efficient duenna.] Madame
Merle meanwhile, as lady-in-waiting to a princess circulating incognita, panted
a little in her rear.
312.21 she imparted all necessary dignity to the girl’s uncountenanced
condition] she imparted all due dignity to the girl’s uncountenanced state
312.23 She played her part with the sagacity that might have been expected of
her; she effaced herself, she accepted the position of a companion] She played
her part with the tact that might have been expected of her, effacing herself and
accepting the position of a companion
312.24 this graceful pair] this reserved though striking pair
312.26 which was the patroness and which the client] which was patroness
and which client
312.28 To say that Madame Merle improved on acquaintance would mis-
represent the impression she made upon Isabel, who had thought her from the
first a perfectly enlightened woman.] To say that Madame Merle improved on
acquaintance states meagrely the impression she made on her friend, who had
found her from the first so ample and so easy.
312.29 Isabel felt that she knew] Isabel felt she knew
312.31 Madame Merle had also at last redeemed her promise] the admirable
woman had also at last redeemed her promise
312.34 the late M. Merle, an adventurer of the lowest class,] concerned the late
M. Merle, a positive adventurer, she might say, though originally so plausible,
313.2 that Isabel wondered the poor lady had kept so much of her freshness]
that her companion wondered a person so éprouvée could have kept so much
of her freshness
313.4 she saw that it was, after all, a tolerably artificial bloom. Isabel liked her]
she seemed to see it as professional, as slightly mechanical, carried about in its
case like the fiddle of the virtuoso, or blanketed and bridled like the “favourite”
of the jockey. She liked her
313.5 a certain corner of the curtain] a corner of the curtain
313.6 Madame Merle had remained after all a foreigner] she had remained
after all something of a public performer, condemned to emerge only in
character and in costume
313.7 she belonged to the old world] she belonged to the “old, old” world
313.9 the product of a different clime from her own] she was the product of a
different moral or social clime from her own,
313.9 Isabel believed] ¶She believed then
313.12 Isabel suspected that her friend had esoteric views] our young woman
had a sense in her of values gone wrong or, as they said at the shops, marked
down
313.13 She believed $...$ that a morality which differed from her own] She
considered $...$ that a morality differing from her own
313.17 a woman who had raised delicate kindness to an art, and whose nature
was too large for the narrow ways of deception] a person who had raised
delicate kindness to an art and whose pride was too high for the narrow ways of
deception
313.18 Her conception of human motives was different from Isabel’s] Her
conception of human motives might, in certain lights, have been acquired at
the court of some kingdom in decadence
313.24 Once or twice Isabel had a sort of fright, but the reader will be
amused at the cause of it. Madame Merle, as we know, comprehended,
responded, sympathised, with wonderful readiness; yet it had nevertheless
happened that her young friend mentally exclaimed—] She had once or
twice had a positive scare; since it so affected her to have to exclaim, of
her friend,
313.26 this discovery operated as a shock; it left Isabel with a vague horror,]
this discovery operated as a shock, left her with a vague dismay
313.27 The horror of course subsided] The dismay of course subsided
313.29 it left a sort of high-water-mark in the development of this
delightful intimacy] it stood for a high-water-mark in the ebb and flow
of confidence
313.32 Madame Merle had once said that, in her belief, when a friendship
ceased to grow, it immediately began to decline—there was no point of
equilibrium between liking a person more and liking him less.] Madame
Merle had once declared her belief that when a friendship ceases to grow it
immediately begins to decline—there being no point of equilibrium between
liking more and liking less.
314.3 Without estimating the value of this doctrine, I may say that if Isabel’s
imagination, which had hitherto been so actively engaged on her friend’s
behalf, began at last to languish, she enjoyed her society not a particle less
than before. If their friendship had declined, it had declined to a very comfort-
able level. The truth is that in these days the girl had other uses for her
imagination, which was better occupied than it had ever been.] However that
might be, the girl had in these days a thousand uses for her sense of the
romantic, which was more active than it had ever been.
314.8 as these emotions had been] as these emotions had remained
314.10 Gilbert Osmond came down from Florence,] Gilbert Osmond de-
scended from Florence
314.14 she should now be very happy] she should now rejoice
314.15 at the Palazzo Crescentini] at Palazzo Crescentini
314.16 Isabel found her aunt alone] She found her aunt alone
CHAPTER32
315.2 at the window, where we found her] at the window near which we
found her
315.3 the matters that I have just rapidly sketched] the matters I have rapidly
sketched
315.4 She was not thinking of the past, but of the future; of the immediate,
impending hour.] She was not turned to the past, but to the immediate,
impending hour.
315.7 the interesting speculation] the interesting issue
315.14 It could be nothing agreeable; Isabel was convinced of this, and the
conviction had something to do with her being rather paler than usual. For the
rest, however, she wore her natural brightness of aspect; even deep grief, with
this vivid young lady, would have had a certain soft effulgence. She had laid
aside her mourning, but she was still very simply dressed, and as she felt a good
deal older than she had done a year before, it is probable that to a certain extent
she looked so.] It could be nothing in the least soothing—she had warrant for
this, and the conviction doubtless showed in the cloud on her brow. For the
rest, however, all clearness reigned in her; she had put away her mourning and
she walked in no small shimmering splendour. She only felt older—ever so
much, and as if she were “worth more” for it, like some curious piece in an
antiquary’s collection.
315.14 She was not left indefinitely] She was not at any rate left indefinitely
315.16 the servant at last came in and presented her a card. ¶“Let the gentle-
man come in,” said Isabel, who continued to gaze] a servant at last stood before
her with a card on his tray. “Let the gentleman come in,” she said, and
continued to gaze
315.24 Whether on his side Mr. Goodwood felt himself older than on the first
occasion of our meeting him, is a point which we shall perhaps presently
ascertain;] Whether his sense of maturity had kept pace with Isabel’s we shall
perhaps presently ascertain;
315.25 Isabel’s critical glance] her critical glance
315.25 Straight, strong, and fresh,] Straight, strong and hard,
316.1 he looked too deliberate, too serious to be young, and too eager, too
active to be old. Old he would never be, and this would serve as a compensation
for his never having known the age of chubbiness. Isabel perceived that his jaw
had quite the same voluntary look that it had worn in earlier days; but she was
prepared to admit that such a moment as the present was not a time for
relaxation.] if he had neither innocence nor weakness, so he had no practical
philosophy. His jaw showed the same voluntary cast as in earlier days; but a
crisis like the present had in it of course something grim.
316.4 “Poor fellow,” she mentally murmured,] “Poor fellow,
316.5 what a pity that he should waste his splendid force!] what a pity he
should waste so dreadfully his splendid force!
316.8 I hoped that you wouldn’t come.] I hoped you wouldn’t come!
316.9 Caspar Goodwood looked about] he looked about
316.10 he meant to stay a little] he meant to settle
316.12 generously, as she thought] and generously, as she thought
316.14 Never; I wish I had. When did you arrive here?”] Never; I wish I had!
When did you arrive?”
316.19 as if you were coming to a funeral,” Isabel said, forcing a smile, in
order to offer such encouragement as she might to an easy treatment of their
situation.] as if you were coming to bury me!” And she forced a smile of
encouragement to an easy view of their situation.
316.21 She had reasoned out the matter elaborately; she had made it perfectly
clear that she broke no faith, that she falsified no contract] She had reasoned
the matter well out, making it perfectly clear that she broke no faith and
falsified no contract
316.21 afraid of him] afraid of her visitor
316.25 his stiff persistency—a persistency in which there was almost a want of
tact; especially as there was a dull dark beam in his eye which rested on her
almost like a physical weight.] his stiff insistence, an insistence in which there
was such a want of tact; especially when the dull dark beam in his eye rested on
her as a physical weight.
316.26 because I couldn’t think] I couldn’t think
316.27 said Caspar Goodwood, plainly] he candidly declared
316.30 “That is very selfish of you!” Isabel cried,] “That’s very selfish of you!”
she returned
316.31 others have a right] others have yet a right
316.35 I shall never feel anything. I mean anything but that.] I shall never feel
anything—I mean anything but that.
317.2 with a sort of dry deliberateness] with dry deliberateness
317.7 she said, after a little, irrelevantly, by way of answer to Mr. Goodwood’s
speech—] she became, after a little, irrelevant.
317.9 He threw up his head a moment, as if he were calculating.] He threw up
his head as if calculating.
317.15 said Isabel, smiling] she coldly smiled
317.20 Isabel asked him] she asked him
317.22 to talk about Henrietta Stackpole] to talk of Henrietta Stackpole
317.23 this young lady had come to see him] this young lady had been
with him
317.24 “She came to see you?”] “She came to see you?” Isabel then
demanded.
317.29 “I didn’t want to. She will hear it soon enough] “I didn’t want to do
that. She’ll hear it quick enough
317.33 “I guess she’ll come out,” he said.] “I guess she’ll come right out,”
he said.
318.3 Does she know Mr. Osmond?” he asked.] “Does she know Mr. Osmond?”
he enquired.
318.5 Isabel added] she added
318.9 “I don’t know yet.] To which she made answer that she didn’t
know yet.
318.11 Caspar Goodwood asked] he demanded
318.14 only asking questions] only asking questions, doing it quite without
delicacy
318.16 ¶“What is Mr. Osmond?” ¶“What is he? Nothing at all but a very good
man.] “Who and what then is Mr. Gilbert Osmond?” ¶“Who and what?
Nobody and nothing but a very good and very honourable man.
318.20 The satisfaction $...$ was certainly small] The satisfaction $...$ was,
however, small
318.22 “Where does he come from?” he went on.] “Where does he come
from? Where does he belong?”
318.23 “From nowhere.] She had never been so little pleased with the way he
said “belawng.” “He comes from nowhere.
318.24 that he was an American] he was American
318.28 flushing a little, and defensively] flushing all defensively
318.32 Then he is very simple] Then he’s very quiet and very simple
319.2 Isabel replied, with a smile that had gradually become a trifle defiant]
Isabel replied while her patience helped itself by turning a little to hardness
319.4 a nonentity] a perfect nonentity
319.6 And you don’t mean $...$ he is a nonentity. You think he is a great
man,] And you don’t mean $...$ he’s a perfect nonentity. You think he’s grand,
you think he’s great,
319.8 she thought this very clever of her companion] she felt this really acute
of her companion
319.9 the clairvoyance of such a feeling as his] the aid that passion might
render perceptions she had never taken for fine
319.15 Isabel broke out] she accordingly broke out
319.19 as you are] even just as you are
319.32 She came towards him] She came toward him
320.1 said Caspar] he said
320.7 when she received that morning the note in which he told her that he
was in Florence, and, with her permission, would come] on receiving early that
day the news he was in Florence and by her leave would come within an hour to
see her.
320.10 so full of implication] so full of heavy implications
320.16 a dumb misery about him which irritated her] a dumb misery about
him that irritated her
320.18 she was as angry as a woman who had been in the wrong] she was
angry in the way a woman is angry when she has been in the wrong
320.29 If he had not held himself hard] And if he had not meanwhile held
himself hard
320.35 you said it so positively] you said it with such a manner
321.1 Isabel was silent an instant.] She considered this an instant.
321.8 no mistake at all] no mistake whatever
321.15 Even iron sometimes melts.] Even iron sometimes melts!
321.23 Isabel’s humbleness] Her humbleness
321.30 Isabel murmured] she felt the poverty of her presently replying
321.31 If you are afraid I am tired,] If you’re afraid I’m knocked up—in any
such way as that—
321.34 he said] he said without a quaver
321.36 And he went out. Five minutes after he had gone she burst into tears.]
Five minutes after he had gone out she burst into tears.
CHAPTER33
322.1 Her fit of weeping $...$ was of brief duration] Her fit of weeping $...$
was soon smothered
322.10 and then she said to her—] and then she began.
322.12 Mrs. Touchett $...$ looked at the girl] Mrs. Touchett $...$ looked
at her
322.28 without the gentleman being urged?] without the gentleman’s having
had to be lashed up?
322.31 took the trouble for him] took the trouble for him
323.5 you like him] you like him so much
323.6 I thought you liked him yourself.] I thought he even pleased you.
323.7 I did,] He did, at one time;
323.12 since you did?] since others have done so?
323.13 “I never wanted to marry him; there is nothing of him.”] “Others, at
their wildest moments, never wanted to marry him. There’s nothing of him,”
Mrs. Touchett explained.
323.15 No one is happy.] No one’s happy, in such doings, you should know.
323.17 What you will marry for] What you will marry for
323.25 But they give some other reason!] But they give some other reason.
323.28 to have some] to have a little
324.20 She told me that she] She told me she
325.8 said Isabel, smiling] the girl smiled
325.12 “I am glad of that!” cried the girl, gaily.] “I’m glad of that!” cried Isabel
gaily.
325.15 I will say nothing more] I shall say nothing more
325.15 I will talk to others] I shall talk to others
325.20 two ladies went to breakfast, where Mrs. Touchett was as good as her
word, and made no allusion to Gilbert Osmond] the aunt and the niece went to
breakfast, where Mrs. Touchett, as good as her word, made no allusion to
Gilbert Osmond
325.25 An American, of course. It is only an American that calls] An
American gentleman of course. It’s only an American gentleman who calls
325.31 “He’s an American truly.”] “He’s an American gentleman truly.”
325.36 in telling him the news, he betrayed at first no knowledge of the great
fact] in imparting to him the great fact, he showed at first no open knowledge
of it
326.1 Their first talk was naturally about his health] Their prompted talk was
naturally of his health
326.5 Isabel wondered whether he were really worse or whether she was
simply disaccustomed] she wondered if he were really worse or if she were
simply disaccustomed
326.5 Poor Ralph grew no handsomer] Poor Ralph made no nearer approach
to conventional beauty
326.9 His face wore its pleasant perpetual smile, which perhaps suggested wit
rather than achieved it] Blighted and battered, but still responsive and still ironic,
his face was like a lighted lantern patched with paper and unsteadily held
326.18 the want of seriousness with which he appeared to regard a world] the
want of seriousness marking his view of a world
326.19 his own presence] his own continued presence
326.21 These things were endeared by association] They had been sweetened
by association
326.22 the conditions of his being so charming] the very terms on which it
had been given him to be charming
326.22 Ralph was so charming] He was so charming
326.26 the luxury of being simply personal] the luxury of being exclusively
personal
326.27 This personality of Ralph’s was delightful; it had none of the stale-
ness of disease; it was always easy and fresh and genial.] The personality so
resulting was delightful; he had remained proof against the staleness of
disease; he had had to consent to be deplorably ill, yet had somehow escaped
being formally sick.
326.29 she had given him] she had allowed him
326.31 but Isabel always had a dread of wasting compassion] she always had a
dread of wasting that essence
326.32 it took no great ingenuity to discover] it took no great sensibility
to feel
326.33 He was a dear, bright, generous fellow;] He was a bright, free, gener-
ous spirit,
326.35 he was dying] he was distressfully dying
326.35 Isabel said to herself] Isabel noted afresh
327.3 her affection for her cousin] her affection for him
327.10 to please Ralph] to please him
327.11 it would be absurd to think it important] it would be absurd to regard
as important
327.13 He had pretended to think she had better marry Lord Warburton] He
had pretended to believe she had better have married Lord Warburton
327.15 the opposite one] the opposite
327.17 if she would only give her mind] should she only give her mind
327.19 wonderfully good-humoured] most patient and most indulgent
327.21 the more odd that he should say nothing] the more odd he should say
nothing
327.22 Isabel became impatient] our young woman wearied of waiting
327.24 his arrival at the Palazzo Crescentini,] his arrival at Palazzo
Crescentini
327.26 which was even more sensibly chilling] which had been even more
sensibly chilling
327.28 his cousin was lost] the person in the world in whom he was most
interested was lost
327.30 He $...$ sat $...$ in a great cane chair, with his long legs extended] He
$...$ sat $...$ on a great cane chair, his long legs extended
327.33 If Isabel were irreclaimable,] If the girl were irreclaimable
327.36 to persuade her that the man to whom she had pledged her faith was a
humbug would be decently discreet] to persuade her of anything sordid or
sinister in the man to whose deep art she had succumbed would be decently
discreet
328.5 at the Palazzo Crescentini] at Palazzo Crescentini
328.12 in the grey Italian shade] through the grey Italian shade
CHAPTER34
329.6 The stillness of noontide hung over it; the warm shade was motionless,
and the hot light made it pleasant.] The stillness of noontide hung over it, and
the warm shade, enclosed and still, made bowers like spacious caves.
329.15 he was visibly preoccupied] he had visibly had something to brood
over
329.15 she had attributed his long reveries] she had explained his air of
absence
329.18 partly to his being troubled about certain arrangements he had
made as to the property inherited from his father—arrangements of which
Mrs. Touchett disapproved] partly by worries connected with the property
inherited from his father—the fruit of eccentric arrangements of which
Mrs. Touchett disapproved
329.22 and he took no more interest] and took no more interest
329.23 you look tired] you look too tired
329.24 I feel tired.] I feel too tired.
329.27 “What do you wish to arrive at?” Isabel said,] “What do you wish to
arrive at?” she put to him,
329.30 “Don’t think too much of it,” said Isabel, lightly.] “Don’t think too
much of it,” she lightly returned.
330.2 the point I wish to fix] the point I want to fix
330.3 I had an idea that you have found me wanting in good manners;] I had
an idea you may have found me wanting in good manners.
330.5 I will tell you now,” said Ralph.] I’ll tell you now,” Ralph said.
330.8 He leaned back, with his head against the marble pedestal of
Terpsichore,] He leaned back under the protection of Bernini, his head against
his marble pedestal,
330.9 the sides of his wide chair] the rests of his wide chair
330.10 he hesitated for a long time] he hesitated long
330.13 the honour of her ingenious purpose] the honour of her high
decision
330.14 ¶“I think I have hardly got over my surprise,” he said at last.] “I think
I’ve hardly got over my surprise,” he went on at last.
330.18 “If I like my cage, that needn’t trouble you,” said Isabel.] “If I like my
cage, that needn’t trouble you,” she answered.
330.24 “It doesn’t seem to me so charming.”] “It doesn’t look to me now, I
admit, such an inviting expanse.”
330.27 one can’t do that] one can’t do anything so general
330.29 one must choose a good corner] one must choose as good a corner as
possible
331.1 with a rather absurd smile] with rather an absurd smile
331.4 “I might have struck a spark or two!”] “I might have struck a spark
or two.”
331.6 The gentleness of this movement] The mildness of this movement
331.9 You wish to say that you don’t like Mr. Osmond] You wish to say you
don’t like Mr. Osmond
331.11 “I am afraid of you, not of him. If you marry him it won’t be a nice
thing to have said.”] “‘Willing to wound and yet afraid to strike’? I’m willing to
wound him, yes—but not to wound you. I’m afraid of you, not of him. If you
marry him it won’t be a fortunate way for me to have spoken.”
331.14 it seems to me touching] it seems to me too touching
331.16 Isabel stroked] She stroked
331.23 Isabel raised her eyes] She raised her eyes
331.24 “You have said it now; you will suffer for it.”] “You’ve said it now, and
I’m glad you’ve made it so clear. But you’ll suffer by it.”
331.34 Isabel went on] she went on
332.5 I see you have got some idea] I see you’ve some special idea
332.8 You will not move me at all] You’ll not move me an inch
332.15 you would marry a man like Mr. Osmond] you’d decide for—well, for
that type
332.16 “What do you know against him?] “What’s the matter with
Mr. Osmond’s type, if it be one? His being so independent, so individual, is
what I most see in him,” the girl declared. “What do you know against him?
332.18 you are running a risk] you’re running a grave risk
332.19 Marriage is always a risk] Marriage is always a grave risk
332.20 let him recede; I wish he would.] let him back out. I wish to God he
would.
332.21 Isabel leaned back in her chair, folded her arms, and gazed] Isabel
reclined in her chair, folding her arms and gazing
332.25 I thought] I believed
333.1 Isabel waited a little, and then] Isabel waited a little—then
333.5 Mr. Osmond is the best I know; he is important enough for me.]
Mr. Osmond’s the finest I know; he’s good enough for me, and interesting
enough, and clever enough. I’m far more struck with what he has and what he
represents than with what he may lack.
333.6 “I had a sort of vision of your future,” Ralph said,] “I had treated myself
to a charming vision of your future,” Ralph observed
333.7 I amused myself with planning out a kind of destiny for you.] I had
amused myself with planning out a high destiny for you.
333.9 so easily, so soon] so easily or so soon
333.12 “To come down? What strange expressions you use! Is that your
description of my marriage?” ¶“It expresses my idea of it.] “Come down, you
say?” ¶“Well, that renders my sense of what has happened to you.
333.15 down you drop] straight you drop
333.16 as if I] hurts me as if I
33.19 planning out my future] a project for my career
333.23 the girl asked] she pursued
333.24 a higher line] a higher plane
333.28 my dear Isabel!] my dear cousin.
333.31 Ralph hesitated a moment, then he added, “I can’t get over the belief
that there’s something small in Osmond.”] Ralph hesitated, then added: “I
can’t get over the sense that Osmond is somehow—well, small.”
333.33 He had uttered these last words with a tremor of the voice; he was
afraid that she would flash out again.] He had uttered the last word with no
great assurance; he was afraid she would flash out again.
333.35 “Something small?” she said reflectively.] “Small?” She made it sound
immense.
334.2 It’s the proper way to respect others.] It makes one more sure to respect
others.
334.4 to feel one’s relations] to feel one’s relation to things—to others
334.6 the relation in which he stands to me] his relation to me
334.13 his taste should be exquisite] Copy text his tastes should be exquisite;
NYE his taste should be exquisite
334.14 his wife] his bride
334.15 an exquisite taste ruffled?] such a taste—a really exquisite one—
ruffled?
334.18 “Ah, that’s wilful, that’s unworthy of you!” he cried.] “Ah, that’s wilful,
that’s unworthy of you!
334.21 Ralph did the same] he did the same
334.24 “You go too far,” she murmured.] But “You go too far,” she simply
breathed.
334.34 the wildness of despair.] the wildness of despair!
334.35 it is impossible that I should] it’s impossible I should
335.3 if you are really alarmed. But I won’t promise] if you’re really alarmed;
but I won’t promise
335.6 and then she went on,] and then went on
335.31 I am surprised that you should] I’m surprised that you should
335.35 You have got hold of some false idea; it’s a pity] You’ve got hold of
some false idea. It’s a pity
335.36 an eye illuminated by a sentiment] an eye illumined by a sentiment
336.6 She was superb, but she was eager; she was indifferent, but she was
secretly trembling.] She was grand, but she was highly solicitous; she was
indifferent, but she was all in a passion.
336.13 Lord Warburton’s great advantages] his great advantages
336.16 Mr. Osmond is simply a man—he is not a proprietor!] Mr. Osmond’s
simply a very lonely, a very cultivated and a very honest man—he’s not a
prodigious proprietor.
336.18 in reality] in truth
336.20 her passionate good faith] her ardent good faith
336.21 she was consistent] she was dismally consistent
336.23 that she had invented a fine theory about Gilbert Osmond, and loved
him,] that, having invented a fine theory about Gilbert Osmond, she loved him
336.26 Isabel’s power to gratify her imagination] her power to meet the
requirements of her imagination
336.27 full advantage of the privilege] full advantage of the luxury
336.31 Here Ralph stopped,] Here he stopped
336.33 a face full of a deep elation at his opposition having made her own
conception of her conduct more clear to her.] a face of elation—absolutely and
perversely of gratitude. His opposition had made her own conception of her
conduct clearer to her.
337.2 another mouthful of it] another mouthful
337.2 I said to you] I told you
CHAPTER35
338.2 that he was not thought well of at the Palazzo Crescentini] how little he
was approved at Palazzo Crescentini
338.4 little impression upon her] no great impression upon her
338.14 upon Isabel’s mind] on Isabel’s spirit
338.24 to manifest her contempt] to display her contempt
338.31 she thought on the whole but little about it] she had now little free or
unemployed emotion for minor needs
339.5 they made her feel that there was after all something very invidious in
being in love; much as the sentiment was theoretically approved of] they made
her conscious, almost with awe, of the invidious and remorseless tide of the
charmed and possessed condition, great as was the traditional honour and
imputed virtue of being in love
339.5 the tragical side of happiness] the tragic part of happiness
339.8 Gilbert Osmond was not demonstrative; the consciousness of success,
which must now have flamed high within him, emitted very little smoke] ¶ The
elation of success, which surely now flamed high in Osmond, emitted mean-
while very little smoke
339.9 never took a vulgar form] took no vulgar form
339.12 the amorous character] the smitten and dedicated state
339.14 the appearance of devoted intention] the appearance—which pre-
sented indeed no difficulty—of stirred senses and deep intentions
339.20 upon a scintillating surface] on a polished, elegant surface
339.21 Osmond disliked to see] Osmond hated to see
339.22 to be brightened in the reproduction] to be freshened in the repro-
duction even as “words” by music
339.24 His egotism, if egotism it was, had never taken the crude form of
wishing for a dull wife] His egotism had never taken the crude form of desiring
a dull wife
339.27 so that conversation might become a sort of perpetual dessert] so that
talk might become for him a sort of served dessert
339.28 the silvery quality in perfection] the silver quality in this perfection
339.31 the union found little favour among the girl’s relations] their union
enjoyed little favour with the girl’s relations
340.3 “You have not told me that they are pleased] “You’ve not told me
they’re pleased
340.5 I should have learnt it] I should have had some sign of it
340.6 their want of delight] their reserve
340.9 your thinking it’s all right] for your not having the shadow of a doubt
340.9 I don’t care what others think. I have never cared much,] I don’t care
what people of whom I ask nothing think—I’m not even capable perhaps of
wanting to know. I’ve never so concerned myself, God forgive me,
340.11 I won’t pretend that I am sorry] I won’t pretend I’m sorry
340.13 Money is a great advantage.] Money’s a horrid thing to follow, but a
charming thing to meet.
340.14 I have sufficiently proved that I can get on without it;] I’ve sufficiently
proved the limits of my itch for it:
340.15 than most people] than most of the people one sees grubbing and
grabbing
340.16 your own family] your family
340.18 my business is not to bother] my business is not to make myself bad
blood
340.20 wiser, and easier, and brighter] wiser and easier and—I won’t pretend
to deny—brighter and nicer and even stronger
340.21 to be angry that I didn’t have them] to be angry I didn’t have
them
340.23 that I had limited] I had limited
340.29 I see that it’s a delightful story] I see it’s a delightful story
340.33 Upon my word] Upon my honour
340.36 several excellent beliefs] several capital convictions
341.2 we are not heavy, we are not under bonds to any dull limitations. You
are very fresh, and I am well-seasoned. We have got my poor child to amuse us]
we’re not mean, we’re not under bonds to any kind of ignorance or dreariness.
You’re remarkably fresh, and I’m remarkably well-seasoned. We’ve my poor
child to amuse us
341.9 a future of beautiful hours] a future at a high level of consciousness of
the beautiful
341.10 in her mind] in her soul
341.12 some private duty which gathered one’s energies] some private duty
that might gather one’s energies
341.12 She told Ralph that she had “seen life”] She had told Ralph she had
“seen life”
341.13 not of life, but of observation] not of the act of living, but of that of
observing
341.18 a more primitive sentiment—a sentiment which answered all ques-
tions, satisfied all needs, solved all difficulties] a more primitive need—a need
the answer to which brushed away numberless questions, yet gratified infinite
desires
341.18 It simplified the future] It simplified the situation
341.21 she was able to be of use to him] she should be able to be of use to him
341.22 She could marry him with a kind of pride; she was not only taking, but
giving.] She could surrender to him with a kind of humility, she could marry
him with a kind of pride; she was not only taking, she was giving.
341.27 he sat down a while] he sat down a little
341.29 She amused herself with walking off] She found pleasure in walking off
341.35 Isabel gave her approbation in abundance, and it was of that demon-
strated personal kind which the child’s affectionate nature craved. She watched
her development with a kind of amused suspense; Pansy had already become a
little daughter. She was treated so completely as a child that Osmond had not
yet explained to her] Isabel approved in abundance, and the abundance had the
personal touch that the child’s affectionate nature craved. She watched her
indications as if for herself also much depended on them—Pansy already so
represented part of the service she could render, part of the responsibility she
could face. Her father took so the childish view of her that he had not yet
explained to her
342.1 she doesn’t suspect] she doesn’t guess
342.8 an element in the refinement of his character] one of his fine, quiet,
sincere notes
342.9 It seems to me you will not know] It occurs to me that you’ll not know
342.16 Osmond’s æsthetic relish of Pansy’s innocence—her own apprecia-
tion of it being more moral] Osmond’s artistic, the plastic view, as it somehow
appeared, of Pansy’s innocence—her own appreciation of it being more
anxiously moral
342.18 he had broken the news] he had communicated the fact
342.19 who made such a pretty little speech. “Oh, then I shall have a sister!”]
who had made such a pretty little speech—“I shall have a beautiful sister!”
342.30 our young lady] our young woman
342.31 Pansy came in] Pansy arrived
342.33 Pansy was spending the day with her aunt, who thought she was of an
age when she should begin to learn] Pansy was spending the day with that lady,
who thought her of an age to begin to learn
342.35 the elder lady] her relative
343.6 said the good woman’s pupil] said this excellent woman’s pupil
343.12 She is always moving] She’s always in motion, in agitation
343.19 a great good fortune] a good fortune
343.24 You don’t look at all like the word; it is somehow so ugly.] omitted
343.25 I think you will never be cruel. I am not afraid.] I don’t think you’ll
ever so much as pinch or even push me. I’m not afraid at all.
343.26 “I shall be very kind to you.”] “I shall be ever so kind to you.” A vague,
inconsequent vision of her coming in some odd way to need it had intervened
with the effect of a chill.
343.27 “Very well then; I have nothing to fear,” the child declared, lightly.]
“Very well then, I’ve nothing to fear,” the child returned with her note of
prepared promptitude. What teaching she had had, it seemed to suggest—or
what penalties for non-performance she dreaded!
343.29 the Countess Gemini was less than ever in a state of repose] the
Countess Gemini was further than ever from having folded her wings
343.34 she entered the room with a great deal of expression, and kissed Isabel,
first on her lips, and then on each cheek, in the short, quick manner of a bird
drinking. She made Isabel sit down on the sofa beside her, and looking at our
heroine with a variety of turns of the head, delivered herself of a hundred
remarks, from which I offer the reader but a brief selection.] she entered the
room with a flutter through the air and kissed Isabel first on the forehead and
then on each cheek as if according to some ancient prescribed rite. She drew
the visitor to a sofa and, looking at her with a variety of turns of the head, began
to talk very much as if, seated brush in hand before an easel, she were applying
a series of considered touches to a composition of figures already sketched in.
343.36 whether I do or not] if I do or not
343.36 I believe you are very proud.] I believe you’re supposed not to care—
through being so clever—for all sorts of ordinary things.
344.1 whether I tell fibs or not] if I tell fibs
344.2 there is something to be gained] there’s something rather good to be
gained
344.2 what there is to be gained] what’s to be gained
344.5 I don’t make phrases—I never made a phrase in my life. My fibs are
always very crude. I am very glad, for my own sake, that you are going to marry
Osmond] I don’t make professions any more than I make paper flowers or
flouncey lampshades—I don’t know how. My lampshades would be sure to
take fire, my roses and my fibs to be larger than life. I’m very glad for my own
sake that you’re to marry Osmond
344.7 You are very remarkable—you know that’s what people call you]
You’re very brilliant—you know that’s the way you’re always spoken of
344.8 very good-looking and clever, very original] very good-looking and
original, not banal
344.11 rather fallen] dreadfully fallen
344.14 I think it’s the worst thing she can do] I think they ought to make it
somehow not quite so awful a steel trap
344.16 knowing that it isn’t such a blessing to get married] knowing what
horrors she may be in for
344.17 designs upon you,] designs on you
344.21 you won’t respect me,] you won’t respect me, not one little mite,
344.27 you will take his measure at a glance. Some day I will tell you all about
him.] he won’t be a bit, at any time, your affair, and, stupid as he is, he’ll see
you’re not his. Some day, if you can stand it, I’ll tell you all about him.
CHAPTER36
345.1 One afternoon, towards dusk, in the autumn of 1876,] One afternoon of
the autumn of 1876, toward dusk,
345.13 a gentleman of tolerably inveterate habits] a gentleman of constituted
habits
345.16 of his proceedings] of his customary sequences
345.18 For this young lady he conceived a peculiar admiration; she was
exactly the household angel] To this little person he began to pay, on the
spot, particular attention: she struck him as exactly the household angel
345.22 to join some friends] to join other friends
345.23 he should be very unhappy] he should be romantically wretched
345.25 Rosier started] Mr. Rosier started
345.29 He was nervous about the fever, and November, after all, was rather
early in the season.] He might expose himself, unseasoned, to the poison of the
Roman air, which in November lay, notoriously, much in wait.
345.30 Mr. Rosier, who took three grains of quinine every day] this adven-
turer, who took three grains of quinine a day
346.2 that is, he had perceived that Miss Pansy Osmond had not a flaw in her
composition] he had devoted it in vain to finding a flaw in Pansy Osmond’s
composition
346.2 she was in excellent style] she had had the last touch; she was really a
consummate piece
346.5 a touch of the rococo,] a hint of the rococo
346.12 and then—“By Jove! $...$” he had murmured to himself.] and then
“By Jove, $...$” he had yearningly murmured.
346.23 “Ah, but I can’t wear mine,” said Rosier, smiling.] “Ah, but I can’t
wear mine,” smiled the visitor.
346.25 Rosier’s eyes wandered] His eyes wandered
346.28 the young man asked quickly] the young man quickly asked
346.30 “I love my things,” said Rosier, as he sat there smiling.] “I love my
things,” said Mr. Rosier as he sat there flushed with all his recognitions.
346.34 Madame Merle started a little.] Madame Merle opened wide eyes.
347.1 She looked at him with a little frown, stroking her chin.] She
looked at him with a friendly frown, stroking her chin with her large
white hand.
347.6 Mr. Osmond doesn’t think me a phœnix] that for Mr. Osmond I’m
not—well, a real collector’s piece
347.8 her mouth drawn up to the left] her handsome mouth drawn up to
the left
347.16 good bibelots;] good Louis Quatorze.
347.17 there is no telling what one may get by it.] It’s very rare now, and
there’s no telling what one may get by it.
347.18 And the left-hand corner] With which the left-hand corner
347.21 Edward Rosier stared and blushed; his correct features were suffused
with disappointment.] But he looked, in spite of it, literally apprehensive and
consistently strenuous.
347.23 Excuse me] Pardon me
347.28 Madame Merle was silent a moment.] Madame Merle considered.
347.34 with an amiable sigh] with an amiable sigh of good faith
348.1 Edward Rosier raised his eyebrows.] He raised his eyebrows.
348.3 They think very differently.] They think quite differently.
348.8 She has told me that she loves her] She has told me how she
loves her
348.12 Never, until I have assured myself] Never till I’ve assured myself
348.14 your conduct is most estimable] you observe the proprieties
348.15 poor Rosier murmured] the young man murmured
348.18 a person who saw things clearly] a person who saw things as she
saw them
348.19 I think your conduct is in excellent taste] I think your conduct in
excellent taste
348.26 cried the young man, with an ingenuous radiance in his face.] her
visitor cried with prompt elation
348.28 assuming that your cause is good] assuming your cause to be good
348.29 whether it is] if it is
348.30 “I’m a dear little fellow,”] “I’m awfully decent, you know,”
348.32 All that is negative. What is the positive side?] All that’s negative, and
it always depends, also, on what people call vices. What’s the positive side?
What’s the virtuous?
348.35 the talent that I have] the talent I have
349.4 It wouldn’t be splendid] It wouldn’t be famous
349.6 to be splendid] to be famous
349.8 one can afford to be simple] one can afford—well, quite cheap faience
349.8 anything but muslin] anything but muslin—without the sprig
349.10 “She would be much obliged to you for that theory.”] “Wouldn’t you
even allow her the sprig? She’d be much obliged to you at any rate for that
theory.”
349.13 and extremely graceful] and most tidy—also extremely graceful
349.15 Rosier hesitated a moment.] Rosier scarce demurred.
349.18 a fortune] a large fortune
349.30 Madame Merle was silent a moment.] Madame Merle failed to burst
into speech.
349.34 “Excuse me, I think it may be,” said Rosier, with his persuasive smile.]
Pardon me, I think it may be,” said Rosier quite lucidly.
350.4 Mr. Osmond will probably incline] Mr. Osmond, however, will prob-
ably incline
350.6 He can do so] He can do so
350.11 how you know it] how you know it
350.21 Meanwhile, I will say a word] Meanwhile then I’ll say a word
350.23 Madame Merle rose, rapidly] Madame Merle was on her feet
350.25 whether his hostess had been] whether his hostess had been
351.1 a surface suggesting sprigged porcelain,] a surface suggesting that of a
careful owner’s “best set”
351.3 so much!] so very much!
351.5 you should consider her] you should consider her
351.9 until I have taken a few soundings] till I’ve taken a few soundings
351.12 Oh, you won’t burn up.] Oh, you won’t burn up!
351.15 Mr. Osmond is rather difficult] Mr. Osmond’s pretty hard
351.17 a light laugh] a short laugh
351.19 Ned Rosier repeated, passing out] Ned Rosier repeated, for departure
351.20 worthy of a young man] worthy of an aspirant
351.24 what Madame Merle had said to him] what his adviser had said
to him
351.25 the impression of her somewhat peculiar manner] the impression of
her rather circumspect tone
351.27 as they said in Paris; but it was possible that he had been precipitate.]
as they put it in Paris; but it was possible he had been precipitate.
351.33 Beyond this, Madame Merle had been very gracious to him] She had
indeed shown him benevolence
352.4 Rosier felt rather like a fool when he thought of his appealing to
Madame Merle] Rosier felt rather a fool when he thought of his having
appealed to her
352.17 a palace in Roman parlance] a palace by Roman measure
352.21 a kind of domestic fortress,] a kind of domestic fortress, a pile
352.23 tourists who looked disappointed] tourists who looked, on a vague
survey, disappointed
352.26 nobly-arched loggia overlooking the damp court] nobly-arched loggia
overhanging the damp court
352.30 her husband chose this habitation] her husband had chosen this
habitation
352.32 Limoges enamel,] Limoges enamels
352.36 and, under the threat] and then, under the threat
353.4 very strong in bibelots.] very strong in “good things.”
353.7 they had better things than he] they had even better “French” than he in
Paris
353.7 he was obliged to admit] he was obliged on the spot to admit
353.11 he had obtained a number of fine pieces] he had annexed a number of
fine pieces
353.12 he had got his best things] he had achieved his greatest finds
353.14 For “advice” read “money,”] For “advice” read “cash,”
353.15 his great prizes] his highest prizes
353.19 his first glance was bestowed upon the walls of the room] his first
recognition was for the walls of the saloon
353.24 such eagerness as might be permitted to a gentleman who always
crossed a threshold with an optimistic smile] such eagerness as might be
permitted a gentleman whose smile, as he crossed a threshold, always took
everything comfortable for granted
CHAPTER37
354.3 it was here that Mrs. Osmond usually sat] it was here Mrs. Osmond
usually sat
354.4 in her usually customary place] in her most customary place
354.5 The room was warm, with a sort of subdued brightness] The room was
flushed with subdued, diffused brightness
354.7 the chamber beyond] the next of the series
354.10 Half-a-dozen people] Half a dozen persons
354.12 his eyes were fixed, abstractedly] his eyes had an expression, frequent
with them, that seemed to represent them as engaged with objects more worth
their while than the appearances actually thrust upon them.
354.20 Osmond stood looking at him; he had never before felt the keenness
of this gentleman’s eyes.] Osmond, however, took him in; he had never in his
life felt himself so efficiently looked at.
354.21 Rosier said to himself] he privately reasoned
354.22 she was not within sight] she was not in sight
354.24 he had a fancy that he gave himself airs] having a fancy he gave
himself airs
354.27 he had an inveterate wish to be in the right. He looked round him,
smiling, and then, in a moment, he said—¶“I saw a jolly good piece of Capo di
Monte to-day.”] had ever a strong need of being quite in the right. He looked
round him and smiled, all without help, and then in a moment, “I saw a jolly
good piece of Capo di Monte to-day,” he said.
355.1 Rosier for a moment] Rosier for an instant
355.6 I have nothing that I wish to match.] I’ve nothing I wish to match.
355.7 Poor Rosier was aware that he had blushed, and he was distressed] Poor
Rosier was aware he had blushed; he was distressed
355.8 “Ah, well, I have!”] “Ah, well, I have!”
355.11 she looked brilliant and noble.] she looked high and splendid, as he
had said, and yet oh so radiantly gentle!
355.17 Like his appreciation of her dear little step-daughter, it was based
partly on his fine sense of the plastic; but also on a relish for a more impalpable
sort of merit—that merit of a bright spirit, which Rosier’s devotion to brittle
wares had not made him cease to regard as a quality.] Like his appreciation of
her dear little stepdaughter it was based partly on his eye for decorative
character, his instinct for authenticity; but also on a sense for uncatalogued
values, for that secret of a “lustre” beyond any recorded losing or rediscovering,
which his devotion to brittle wares had still not disqualified him to recognise.
355.34 Ah now, that is hard.] Ah now, that’s hard!
356.1 And Mrs. Osmond smiled vaguely.] And Mrs. Osmond vaguely
smiled.
356.3 “So I tell him,” said Mrs. Osmond,] “So I tell him,” she said,
356.7 The simple truth is that I am dying] The simple truth is I’m dying
356.9 the young lady in pink] the damsel in pink
356.14 he became—comparatively speaking—reckless, and cared little] he
became—comparatively speaking—reckless; he cared little
356.16 the young lady in pink] the damsel in pink
357.10 the inquiry necessary] the enquiry requisite
357.13 He was sure that Pansy had never looked] He was sure Pansy had
never looked
357.21 whether hospitality were the most sacred thing] if hospitality were the
most sacred thing
357.32 the dull girl in pink] the dull girl in so vain a disguise of rose-colour
358.3 a small room which had been thrown open and lighted, but,] a small
room that had been thrown open and lighted, but that,
358.6 it looked very pretty] it looked the very temple of authorised love
358.6 Rosier stood a moment, gazing through this aperture] Rosier gazed a
moment through this aperture
358.8 the young lady in pink] the other maiden
358.10 on the other side of the room] on the far side of the room
358.10 For a moment] For a little
358.12 but a glance assured him that she was not, and then he reflected] but a
second glance assured him she was not, and he then reflected
358.13 After a moment’s supreme hesitation he asked her whether he might
go] After a supreme hesitation he asked her if he might go
358.27 some of it was bad] some of it was very bad
358.33 Rosier was silent a moment.] Rosier was silent a little.
359.1 “To see me?” asked Pansy, raising her vaguely-troubled eyes.] “To see
me?” And Pansy raised her vaguely-troubled eyes.
359.5 ¶“I thought it was for that,” she said.] “I thought it was for that.”
359.23 draw her towards him] draw her toward him
359.25 she would submit without a murmur, she would rest there] she would
submit without a murmur, would rest there
359.31 “Did you say that papa knows?”] “Did you say papa knows?”
359.34 I am sure of you!] I am sure of you!
359.35 Rosier murmured in her ear, while she turned back] Rosier murmured
in her ear; whereupon she turned back
360.21 she knew his tones,] she knew each of his tones
360.24 Don’t tell him that, he will try] Don’t tell him that. He’ll try
360.33 he will try and talk and explain;] he’ll try to talk and explain—
361.2 Oh, he’s enervating, with his eternal majolica.] Oh, he’s a nuisance—
with his eternal majolica.
361.3 Madame Merle dropped her eyes, with a faint smile.] Madame Merle
dropped her eyes; she had a faint smile.
361.5 an income of forty thousand francs——] an income of forty thousand
francs!
361.6 “It’s misery—genteel misery,”] “It’s misery—‘genteel’ misery,”
361.11 I don’t suppose you think that matters] I don’t suppose you consider
that that matters
361.12 I don’t think it matters at all] I don’t consider it matters at all
361.13 she has thought about him] she has thought of him
361.19 he clasped his ankle in his hand, familiarly,] he clasped his ankle in his
hand familiarly—his long, fine forefinger and thumb could make a ring for it—
361.27 Do it yourself.] Keep him yourself.
361.31 A long pause followed] A long drop followed
361.32 before it was broken again,] before it had ended
361.34 Pansy advanced a few steps] The girl advanced a few steps
361.36 Madame Merle said, simply,] Madame Merle went on
362.10 “You are very late,” said the young girl, gently.] “You’re very late,” the
young creature gently said.
362.13 she moved towards Edward Rosier] she moved toward Edward Rosier
362.23 he instinctively wandered towards Isabel] he instinctively wandered
toward Isabel
362.25 the old lady was an Italian] the old lady was Italian
362.26 Rosier took for granted that she understood no English] Rosier took
for granted she understood no English
362.28 when you know—when you know——] when you know—when you
know—!
362.30 He hesitated a little. ¶“When I know what?” Isabel asked, gently.]
Isabel met his hesitation. “When I know what?”
363.10 without saying anything] without ceremony
363.17 He looked about again for Pansy] He searched again for Pansy
363.18 he spoke to Isabel again] he spoke once more to Isabel
363.21 I spoke of Mr. Osmond as I shouldn’t have done, a while ago,” he said.]
“I referred to Mr. Osmond as I shouldn’t have done, a while ago,” he began.
363.27 “If you could—just a little,” said Rosier, “I would never again speak]
“If you could, just a little, I’d never again speak]
CHAPTER38
364.3 until something should have been decided] till something should have
been decided
364.10 he might depend upon that,] he might depend on that;
364.20 anything to communicate which it would please Mr. Rosier to hear]
anything to communicate that it might please Mr. Rosier to hear
364.26 Who is to measure that?] Who’s to measure the possibility?
365.1 Edward Rosier $...$ waited for another Thursday evening before
returning to the Palazzo Roccanera] Edward Rosier $...$ awaited another
Thursday evening before returning to Palazzo Roccanera
365.2 although he went early] though he went early
365.7 his keen, conscious eye] his keen, conscious eyes
365.10 It seemed to poor Rosier that he was being insulted] It seemed to poor
Rosier he was being insulted,
365.15 ¶Rosier flattered himself that he spoke rather sternly.] And he flattered
himself he spoke rather sternly.
365.23 Osmond stared into the fire for a moment.] Osmond stared into the
fire a moment.
365.29 I pretend that she would marry well] I pretend she’d marry well
365.33 “I am not bound $...$,” Osmond said, looking up with a quick, cold
smile.] “I’m not bound $...$”—and Osmond looked up with a quick, cold
smile.
365.35 Osmond continued, bending forward] Osmond continued, now
bending forward
366.5 then he said very quickly—] then he said, all undisturbed:
366.8 Osmond turned round again] the master of the house turned round
again
366.9 Before Rosier had time to rejoin] Before Rosier had time to reply
366.11 to present himself to the master of the house] to present himself to
his host
366.13 the visitor was a handsome man, with a large, fair beard—evidently an
Englishman] the visitor had a handsome face and a large, fair beard, and was
evidently an Englishman
366.19 this gracious lady] his hostess
366.22 the same mystical smile that he had noticed before] the same mystical
smile he had noticed before
366.27 feeling that she too was irritating] with his sense that she too was
irritating
366.32 For a moment she answered nothing. Then—¶“No!” she said
abruptly, and with a quickened light in her eye which directly contradicted
the word. ¶“Excuse me if I don’t believe that.] For a moment she answered
nothing; then, “No!” she said abruptly and with a quickened light in her eyes
which directly contradicted the word. ¶“Pardon me if I don’t believe that.
366.34 Rosier instantly discovered the young girl] Rosier instantly discovered
his friend
367.2 He declares to me that she has given me up.] He declares to me she has
given me up.
367.4 “She has not given you up,” Isabel said, in a low tone, without looking
at him.] “She has not given you up,” Isabel said in a low tone and without
looking at him.
367.8 Osmond was coming towards her,] Osmond was coming toward her
367.10 He thought the latter, $...$ was a little embarrassed.] He judged the
latter, $...$ a little embarrassed.
367.11 said Osmond,] said her husband,
367.17 To do him justice, Isabel] Isabel in fact, to do him justice,
367.18 she hardly knew whether she were glad or not] she hardly knew if she
felt a pleasure or a pain
367.21 Lord Warburton $...$ was plainly very well pleased; his frank grey
eye expressed a deep, if still somewhat shy, satisfaction. He was larger, stouter
than of yore, and he looked older;] Lord Warburton $...$ was plainly quite
sure of his own sense of the matter; though his grey eyes had still their fine
original property of keeping recognition and attestation strictly sincere. He
was “heavier” than of yore and looked older;
367.23 I have only just arrived.] I’ve but just arrived.
367.27 Osmond remarked, smiling, to his wife] Osmond remarked to his wife
367.33 I think it is the same one where I saw you four years ago.] I think it’s
the same at which I saw you four years since.
367.34 Do you remember where I bade you good-bye?] Do you remember
where I bade you good-bye?” his lordship asked of his hostess.
368.1 I remember that you were there] I remember you there
368.2 it became a melancholy sort of memory] it became almost a dismal
memory
368.4 But I knew you were living here,] But I knew you were living here,”
her old friend went on to Isabel,
368.5 It must be a charming place to live in,” said Lord Warburton, brightly,
looking about him.] “It must be a charming place to live in,” he added with a
look, round him, at her established home, in which she might have caught the
dim ghost of his old ruefulness.
368.7 Osmond remarked with propriety] Osmond observed with
propriety
368.9 my travels were over] my travels over
368.11 who had now completely recovered her self-possession] who had
already, with her rare capacity for such inward feats, taken the measure of
what meeting him again meant for her
368.12 My life has been a blank.] My life has been a remarkably complete
blank.
368.15 his duties as a host had now terminated, he had performed them very
conscientiously] his duties as a host now terminated—he had performed them
so conscientiously
368.21 “I am afraid you lose a good deal!” said Lord Warburton,] “I’m afraid
you lose a good deal!” Lord Warburton called after him, as he moved away,
368.22 his appreciation of Osmond’s generosity] an appreciation of his
generosity
368.24 He stood a moment, looking at Isabel with an eye that gradually
became more serious.] Then the visitor turned on Isabel the deeper, the
deepest, consciousness of his look, which gradually became more serious.
368.27 Isabel hesitated a moment.] She just hesitated.
368.31 “I think I shall have no scruple in saying that to you,” said Isabel,
smiling.] “I think I shall have no scruple in saying that to you,” she bravely
returned.
368.33 a pity that there shouldn’t be something] a pity there shouldn’t be
something
368.34 ¶They sat down, and Isabel asked him] They sat down and she
asked him
369.1 he would prove a more comfortable companion than of yore] he would
press with less of his whole weight than of yore
369.3 Time had breathed upon his heart, and without chilling this organ, had
freely ventilated it.] Time had breathed upon his heart and, without chilling it,
given it a relieved sense of having taken the air.
369.5 Lord Warburton’s manner was certainly that of a contented man who
would rather like one to know it.] Her friend’s manner was certainly that of a
contented man, one who would rather like people, or like her at least, to know
him for such.
369.6 he said] he resumed
369.10 “I will go and see him,” said Isabel, quickly.] “I’ll go to see him,” she
immediately said.
369.12 an idea that you hadn’t seen much] an idea you hadn’t seen much
369.13 like an awkward Englishman] like an awkward Briton
369.19 and remain in England] and to remain in England
369.22 found him extremely ill] found him thoroughly ill
369.30 and make himself comfortable;] could make himself comfortable,
369.35 as a kind of moderator. Poor Touchett’s very moderate now.] a kind of
moderator. Poor Ralph’s very moderate now.
370.2 he’s beyond human help.] he’s beyond human help. I wanted him to
take with him some clever fellow—I mean some sharp young doctor; but he
wouldn’t hear of it.
370.4 to choose for going to America] to decide on going to America
370.6 and she lets nothing turn her aside] and lets nothing turn her aside
370.11 Isabel started up. ¶“I will go to him now!”] Isabel sprang up. “I’ll go to
him then now.”
370.14 I don’t mean that I thought so] I don’t mean I thought so
370.17 he told me that he was very tired] he told me he was very tired
370.19 I didn’t think of it till after we separated] I didn’t decide to till after we
had separated
370.20 I remembered that he had told me that you had an evening] I
remembered he had told me you had an evening
370.22 tell you that he was here, and let you know that you had perhaps
better not wait] tell you he’s here, and let you know you had perhaps better
not wait
370.26 her visitor added, gallantly] her visitor gallantly added
370.35 as bold a radical as ever] as wild a radical as ever
371.1 I don’t feel nearly so bold] I don’t feel nearly so wild
371.4 he calls me the head of the Communists] he calls me the King of the
Goths—says I have, down to the details of my personal appearance, every sign
of the brute
371.8 that he had a consciousness of other possible topics] he had a concep-
tion of other possible topics
371.13 she could see that he only wished] she could see he only wished
371.14 to understand that he had forgiven her] to understand he had
forgiven her
371.17 she had no suspicion that he wished to punish her] she had no
suspicion of his wishing to punish her
371.18 to believe that it had simply occurred to him] to believe it had simply
occurred to him
371.19 in knowing that he was resigned] in knowing he was resigned
371.24 he spoke of it without implication] he spoke of it without implications
371.28 he told her that he had been immensely interested in hearing of her
marriage—that it was a great pleasure to him to make Mr. Osmond’s acquain-
tance] he told her he had been immensely interested in hearing of her marriage
and that it was a great pleasure for him to make Mr. Osmond’s acquaintance
371.30 He had not written to her when she married, but he did not apologise
to her for that.] He had not written to her at the time of that passage in her
history, but he didn’t apologise to her for this.
371.34 like a man to whom everything suggested a cheerful interpretation—]
like a person amused, at a provincial entertainment, by some innocent game of
guesses—
372.6 “You have got a very good house.”] “You’ve got an awfully good
house.”
372.8 “You mean that he has arranged it?”] “You mean he has arranged it?”
372.16 Do you mean that you accept] Do you mean you accept
372.18 I shall propose you something] I shall propose to you something
372.22 I like sitting here] I prefer sitting here
372.31 saying that you had changed] saying you had changed
372.33 said Isabel, with gaiety] said Isabel with mild gaiety
373.1 But I want to marry] But I do want to marry
373.4 “It ought to be very easy,” Isabel said, rising, and then blushing a little at
the thought that she was hardly the person to say this.] “It ought to be very
easy,” Isabel said, rising—after which she reflected, with a pang perhaps too
visible, that she was hardly the person to say this.
373.5 Lord Warburton noticed her blush] Lord Warburton divined the
pang
373.6 the incongruity] her not having contributed then to the facility
373.7 Rosier meanwhile had seated himself] Rosier had meanwhile seated
himself
373.13 “Don’t speak so loud, or every one will hear us,” said Pansy.] “Don’t
speak so loud—every one will hear,” said Pansy.
373.14 They won’t hear us] They won’t hear
373.15 the wish that the kettle would boil] the wish the kettle would boil
373.17 the young girl exclaimed, with a little sigh]—and she sighed with the
weight of her responsibility
373.21 I mean what I say to you] I mean what I say to you
373.22 “He told me that you had forgotten me.”] “He told me you had
forgotten me.”
373.26 “Then everything is just the same?” ¶“Ah no, it’s not just the same.
Papa has been very severe.”] “Then everything’s just the very same?” ¶“Ah no,
not the very same. Papa has been terribly severe.”
373.33 Pansy raised the lid] She raised the lid
374.3 Pansy was silent a moment;] She was silent a little;
374.8 said the young girl] said the girl
374.16 She hesitated a moment.] She hesitated again.
374.23 ¶“She is not afraid of any one!] “She’s not afraid of any one.
374.28 and when he looked up] and, as he looked up,
374.30 the English lord whom Mrs. Osmond had presented] the English lord
whom Mrs. Osmond had introduced
CHAPTER39
375.1 It probably will not be surprising to the reflective reader] It will
probably not surprise the reflective reader
375.5 after this he had held his peace] after this had held his peace
375.8 the difference that he feared,] the difference he feared
375.25 would lay upon her spirit a burden that would make her hate him.
Such had been,] would lay upon her spirit such a burden as to make her hate
him. So dismal had been,
375.27 Ralph’s rather dismal prevision of the future] Ralph’s prevision of the
future
375.28 we must remember that he was not in the bloom of health] we must
remember he was not in the bloom of health
376.1 had thoughts of celebrating her nuptials] had thought of celebrating
her nuptials
376.5 this characteristic would best be preserved by their being married] this
characteristic would be best embodied in their being married
376.12 Madame Merle $...$ sent a gracious letter] Madame Merle $...$ had
written a gracious letter
376.19 Her return to Europe took place somewhat later, and she effected a
meeting] Her return to Europe had taken place somewhat later, and she had
effected a meeting
376.20 she indulged $...$ her critical genius] she had indulged $...$ her
critical genius
376.21 Poor Osmond $...$ protested so sharply] Poor Osmond $...$ had
protested so sharply
376.22 a step which erected a barrier] a step which put a barrier
376.24 she deemed it her duty] she had deemed it her duty
376.27 Henrietta’s second visit to Europe, however, was not made in vain]
Henrietta’s second visit to Europe, however, was not apparently to have been
made in vain
376.30 Mr. Bantling appeared upon the scene] Mr. Bantling had appeared
upon the scene
376.32 Henrietta’s letters from Spain proved to be the most picturesque]
Henrietta’s letters from Spain had proved the most acceptable
377.1 Isabel was secretly disappointed at her husband’s not having been
able to judge the poor girl more humorously. She even wondered whether
his sense of humour were by chance defective.] Isabel had been secretly
disappointed at her husband’s not seeing his way simply to take the poor
girl for funny. She even wondered if his sense of fun, or of the funny—
which would be his sense of humour, wouldn’t it?—were by chance
defective.
377.3 Osmond thought their alliance] Osmond had thought their alliance
377.6 he also pronounced her] he had also pronounced her
377.7 Isabel protested with an ardour which made him wonder] Isabel had
appealed with an ardour that had made him wonder
377.11 Isabel answered] Isabel had answered
377.14 Ralph saw nothing of her] Ralph had seen nothing of her
377.15 two years that followed her marriage] two years that had followed her
marriage
377.17 he spent again at San Remo, where he was joined in the spring by his
mother, who afterwards went with him to England] he had spent again at San
Remo, where he had been joined in the spring by his mother, who afterwards
had gone with him to England
377.20 a small villa, which he occupied] a small villa which he had
occupied
377.21 he came down to Rome] he had come down to Rome
377.23 his desire to see her again was of the keenest] his desire to see her again
was then of the keenest
377.24 her letters told him nothing that he wanted to know] her letters told
him nothing he wanted to know
377.31 her marriage was a shabby affair. It gave her no pleasure] her marriage
had been a shabby affair. It had given her no pleasure
377.35 The Countess was less talked about in these days] The Countess was
less talked of in these days
378.1 how she had been talked about before] how she had been talked of
before
378.8 without a symptom of irritation] and showing no symptom of
irritation
378.13 that she saw that Isabel was not eager to marry, and that Osmond was
not eager to please (his repeated visits were nothing] she saw Isabel was not
eager to marry and Osmond not eager to please (his repeated visits had been
nothing
378.21 Madame Merle, after this, chose to pass many months] Madame
Merle had, after this, chosen to pass many months
378.26 while he was engaged in this pursuit he felt afresh] while engaged in
this pursuit he had yet felt afresh
378.30 to profess delight in her marriage] to profess delight in her union
378.33 But now she neither taunted him] At present, however, she neither
taunted him
378.36 the serenity painted upon it] the serenity painted on it
379.1 —it was a representation.]—it was a representation, it was even an
advertisement.
379.5 She seemed to be leading] She appeared to be leading
379.15 producing calculated impressions] producing studied impressions
379.18 people that were talked about] people who were talked about
379.21 he used to exercise his wit] he had been used to exercise his wit
379.24 she even spoke faster, moved faster, than before her marriage] she
even spoke faster, moved faster, breathed faster, than before her marriage
379.35 but there was a kind of amplitude and brilliancy in her personal
arrangements which gave a touch of insolence to her beauty] yet there was
an amplitude and a brilliancy in her personal arrangements that gave a touch of
insolence to her beauty
380.5 “Good heavens, what a function!” he exclaimed.] “Good heavens, what
a function!” he then woefully exclaimed.
380.10 his effects were elaborately studied] his effects were deeply
calculated
380.17 but it’s rich abundance] it’s rich abundance
380.24 pose so deeply calculated] pose so subtly considered
380.26 the land of calculation] the land of consideration
380.28 had been a pose of years] had been the conscious attitude of
years
380.33 It made him feel great to play the world a trick.] It had made him feel
great, ever, to play the world a trick.
380.35 his marrying Isabel Archer] his marrying Miss Archer
381.3 for what they are worth] for what they may at the time have been worth
381.6 Gilbert Osmond appeared to regard him] the husband of the woman he
loved appeared to regard him
381.7 For Mr. Osmond Ralph had not now that importance.] ¶For Gilbert
Osmond Ralph had not now that importance.
381.12 whether he was comfortable] whether he were comfortable
381.17 Ralph had, towards the end, an inward conviction that Osmond had
made it uncomfortable for his wife that she should continue to receive her
cousin] Ralph had had, toward the end, a sharp inward vision of Osmond’s
making it of small ease to his wife that she should continue to receive
Mr. Touchett
381.21 when his suspicion had become sharp, he took himself off. In doing so
he deprived Isabel] so when his suspicion had become sharp, he had taken
himself off. In doing so he had deprived Isabel
381.23 what fine principle kept him alive. She decided that it was his love of
conversation] what fine principle was keeping him alive. She had decided that
it was his love of conversation
381.25 almost any chair would do] almost any chair would serve
381.30 he had not yet seen enough of his cousin;] he had not yet seen enough
of the person in the world in whom he was most interested:
381.32 He wished to see] He wanted to see
381.34 His determination held good; it kept him going] His determination
had held good; it had kept him going
381.36 It gave him indeed such an air] It had given him indeed such
an air
382.6 Isabel ascended to his apartment] Isabel mounted to his apartment
382.9 on Isabel sending a carriage] on their sending their carriage
382.10 to the Palazzo Roccanera] to Palazzo Roccanera
382.18 “Well, I guess I won’t go anywhere,” said Ralph, from the sofa, in a
tone of jocosity.] “Well, I guess I won’t go anywhere,” said Ralph, from the
sofa, all shamelessly.
382.19 “Do you mean that you will return to England?”] “Do you mean you’ll
return to England?”
382.21 “Rome won’t do for you; it’s not warm enough.”] “Rome won’t do for
you. Rome’s not warm enough.”
382.24 puffing his cigar, as if he were trying to see it] puffing a cigar and as if
trying to see it
382.28 “I can’t try,” said poor Ralph; “I can’t move further.] “I can’t try,” said
poor Ralph. “I’ve done trying. I can’t move further.
382.35 As I’m here I’ll stay; I haven’t got any cousins in Sicily.] As I’m here I’ll
stay. I haven’t a single cousin in Sicily—much less a married one.
383.4 you don’t go to Sicily] you don’t insist on Sicily
383.13 “You are a very good fellow. You are very kind.”] “You’re a very good
Christian. You’re a very kind man.”
383.26 of my wanting to be here] of my desiring to be here
383.33 These two gentlemen were children of a race] These two were gentle-
men of a race
383.36 an old subject that they had once discussed] an old subject they had
once discussed
384.7 “The doctor’s consent will spoil it; I never have it when I can help it!”
¶“What does Mrs. Osmond think?”] “The doctor’s consent will spoil it. I never
have it when I can help it.” ¶“What then does Mrs. Osmond think?” Ralph’s
friend demanded.
384.13 you are not bound to mind it. It’s his affair.] you’re not bound to mind
his likings. They’re his affair.
384.21 I thought it my duty to go away.] I thought it my duty to disappear.
384.23 “My dear Touchett, your defensive powers—”] “My dear Touchett,
your defensive powers—!”
384.26 “Your duty $...$,” he said.] “Your duty $...$,” he observed instead.
384.28 ¶“It is true $...$,” he remarked at last] “It’s true $...$,” he returned
at last
385.4 She told me $...$ that she was happy.] She told me $...$ she was happy.
385.8 “Complain? She will never complain. She has done it, and she knows
it.] “Complained? She’ll never complain. She has done it—what she has done—
and she knows it.
385.16 he $...$ stood before the fire, blushing a little] he $...$ stood before the
fire, looking at it hard
385.26 “how tickled Gilbert Osmond will be!”] “how cheered-up old Osmond
will be!”
385.28 I shan’t marry his daughter to please him.] I shouldn’t propose for his
daughter to please him.
385.35 Lord Warburton seemed scarcely to be in the mood] Lord Warburton
seemed scarcely in the mood
386.1 “Do you think she’ll be pleased?”] “Do you judge she’ll be pleased?”
386.6 She is very fond of the girl.] She’s very fond of Pansy.
386.8 how far her fondness for the girl will carry her] how far her fondness
for Pansy will carry her
386.9 with a rather sombre eye] and rather a clouded brow
386.11 “I hope, you know, that you are very—very sure—The deuce!” he
broke off, “I don’t know how to say it.”] “I hope, you know, that you’re
very—very sure. The deuce!” he broke off. “I don’t know how to say it.”
CHAPTER40
387.12 there was still a kind of wonder] there was still much wonder
387.14 Madame Merle was armed at all points; it was a pleasure to see a
person so completely equipped] That personage was armed at all points; it was
a pleasure to see a character so completely equipped
387.21 there was something brilliant] there was something gallant
387.24 Isabel $...$ became acquainted with revulsions, with disgust] Isabel
$...$ became acquainted with revulsions, with disgusts
387.25 she asked herself with some peremptoriness] she asked herself with
some sharpness
387.28 with the idea of a new attempt] the idea of some new adventure
387.28 As a young girl, she used to proceed] As a younger person she had
been used to proceed
387.31 she lived entirely by reason, by wisdom] she lived entirely by reason
and by wisdom
388.2 if Madame Merle had been near,] if her brilliant friend had been near
388.6 Madame Merle made a continuous stay] the personage in question
made again a continuous stay
388.15 The best way to profit by Madame Merle] The best way to profit by her
friend
388.21 that Madame Merle was changed—that she pushed to the extreme a
certain rather artificial fear] that her old ally was different, was almost
detached—pushing to the extreme a certain rather artificial fear
388.28 our heroine] our young woman
388.32 she was after all not one of them] she was not after all of the inner
circle
389.12 you would simply say that I was forgetting certain differences] you’d
simply say I was forgetting certain differences
389.13 Of course a good friend] Certainly a good friend
389.24 of nature, of providence, of fortune] of nature, providence, fortune
389.25 It was true that her aunt’s complaint] It was true her aunt’s complaint
389.27 she had brought about the marriage] she had brought about the
strange event
389.29 the cause of the most fertile friendship] the producing cause of the
most important friendship
389.30 That occurred to her] This had occurred to her
389.31 after her little discussion with her aunt.] after her little discussion with
her aunt and at a time when she was still capable of that large inward reference,
the tone almost of the philosophic historian, to her scant young annals.
389.31 If Madame Merle had desired the event,] If Madame Merle had
desired her change of state
389.34 After her marriage] After their union
389.35 her husband took a less comfortable view] her husband took a less
convenient view
390.1 he seldom spoke of Madame Merle, and when his wife alluded to her he
usually let the allusion drop. ¶“Don’t you like her?” Isabel had once said to
him.] he seldom consented to finger, in talk, this roundest and smoothest
bead of their social rosary. ¶“Don’t you like Madame Merle?” Isabel had once
said to him.
390.5 She is so good! I am glad she is not in Italy; it’s a sort of rest.] She’s so
almost unnaturally good! I’m glad she’s not in Italy; it makes for relaxation—
for a sort of moral détente.
390.10 she was somewhat changed, Isabel’s feelings were also altered] she was
sensibly different, Isabel’s feelings were also not quite the same
390.11 whatever else it lack] whatever else it may miss
390.13 The fact of Madame Merle having had a hand] The fact of Madame
Merle’s having had a hand
390.14 it seemed, after all] it might have been written, after all
390.18 This reflection, however, was instantly stifled; Isabel felt a sort of
horror] That reflection indeed was instantly stifled; she knew an immediate
horror
390.26 her brilliant friend] her friend
390.28 Moreover, she herself was so unable to explain.] She was herself
moreover so unable to explain.
390.31 She almost wished that jealousy had been possible; it would be a kind
of refreshment. Jealousy, after all, was in a sense one of the symptoms of
happiness.] She almost wished jealousy had been possible; it would have made
in a manner for refreshment. Wasn’t it in a manner one of the symptoms of
happiness?
390.33 it would seem that she knew Isabel better than Isabel knew herself] so
wise that she might have been pretending to know Isabel better than Isabel
knew herself
391.4 The poor girl had always had a great desire to do her best, and she had
not as yet been seriously discouraged. She wished, therefore, $...$ not to pay
herself by petty revenges.] Her poor winged spirit had always had a great desire
to do its best, and it had not as yet been seriously discouraged. It wished,
therefore, $...$ not to pay itself by petty revenges.
391.5 To associate Madame Merle with her disappointment] To associate
Madame Merle with its disappointment
391.6 the pleasure she might derive from it] the pleasure to be derived
from that
391.13 there was only one way to repair it—to accept it] there was only one
way to repair it—just immensely (oh, with the highest grandeur!) to accept it
391.20 she was at present very thankful for Pansy. It was a part of her
tenderness] she was at present very thankful for Pansy—it was also a part of
her tenderness
391.22 there was nothing in her life so much as it should be as the young girl’s
attachment and the pleasantness of feeling it] there was nothing else in her life
that had the rightness of the young creature’s attachment or the sweetness of
her own clearness about it
391.24 it was a kind of faith] it was a kind of ardent coercive faith
391.25 her sense of Pansy’s dependence] her sense of the girl’s dependence
391.26 it operated as a command, as a definite reason] it operated as a definite
reason
391.29 a kind of admonition] a direct admonition
391.30 here was an opportunity. An opportunity for what,] here was an
opportunity, not eminent perhaps, but unmistakeable. Yet an opportunity
for what
391.35 She had been unable to believe that any one could care so much] She
had been unable to believe any one could care so much
392.1 and she knew what to think of it] and now she knew what to think of it
392.13 he had always been elaborately soft. Isabel knew that Pansy liked
immensely to be with her and studied the means of pleasing her.] he had
always been luxuriously mild. Isabel knew how Pansy liked to be with her and
how she studied the means of pleasing her.
392.16 a conviction which certainly could not have had any reference to
trouble already existing] a conviction which certainly could have had no
reference to trouble already existing
392.19 that she thought otherwise] that she could have thought otherwise
392.24 the second winter at the Palazzo Roccanera] the second winter at
Palazzo Roccanera
392.27 she knew that Pansy had a passionate pleasure] she knew her little
companion had a passionate pleasure
392.32 beside Isabel, she sat in a little fixed appreciative posture] beside her
stepmother, she sat in a small fixed, appreciative posture
393.3 Isabel $...$ stepped quickly, though not so quickly as when she first
came to Europe] Isabel $...$ had a swift length of step, though not so swift a
one as on her first coming to Europe
393.6 beside her stepmother] beside her father’s wife
393.7 a tribute to Pansy’s preferences] a tribute to her preferences
393.8 Pansy had gathered a handful of flowers] She had gathered a handful of
flowers
393.9 on reaching the Palazzo Roccanera] on reaching Palazzo Roccanera
393.19 Madame Merle stood there in her bonnet] Copy text Madame Merle
sat there in her bonnet; NYE Madame Merle was there in her bonnet
393.20 they were unaware that she had come in] they were unaware she had
come in
393.22 their dialogue] their colloquy
393.27 her eyes were bent upon his] her eyes were bent on his
393.32 There was nothing shocking in this] There was nothing to shock
in this
393.33 Their relative position] Their relative positions
393.36 Gilbert Osmond, on the other hand] her husband, on the
other hand
394.3 after having asked Madame Merle to excuse him, he left the room] after
having asked their visitor to excuse him, left the room
394.6 “Didn’t he ask you to sit down?” asked Isabel, smiling.] “Didn’t he ask
you to sit down?” Isabel asked with a smile.
394.16 “You look just now as if you didn’t believe me” said Madame Merle.]
“You look just now as if you didn’t believe it,” said Madame Merle.
394.28 I know that] I know very well
394.35 Madame Merle hesitated a moment.] Madame Merle hesitated.
395.4 a sort of question] the sort of question
395.13 If you think me dry, I wonder what he thinks.] If you think me dry, I
wonder what he thinks.
395.26 “She is the dearest little person possible; but she is very limited.”] “The
dearest little person possible—but very limited.”
395.30 with lace] with lace borders
396.13 Then she added,] After which again she added
396.17 Only, this time Isabel saw nothing.] Only this time the latter saw
nothing.
396.23 as much as he thinks] so much as he thinks
397.2 as she stood a moment before the mantel-glass, pushing into its place a
wandering tress of hair] while she stood a moment before the mantel-glass and
pushed into its place a wandering tress of hair
397.4 “Poor Mr. Rosier keeps saying that there is nothing impossible in
Lord Warburton falling in love with Pansy,”] “Poor Mr. Rosier keeps
saying there’s nothing impossible in Lord Warburton’s falling in love with
Pansy,”
397.6 she rejoined at last] she returned at last
397.12 Excuse me; I forgot that you had pointed that out.] Pardon me; I
forgot you had pointed that out.
397.23 Isabel smiled a little.] Isabel’s eyes rested on her.
397.27 and then she said,] and then said
398.9 “Mr. Rosier’s a nuisance!” cried Isabel, abruptly.] “Mr. Rosier’s a
nuisance!” Isabel cried abruptly.
398.18 I wish to see her married] I want to see her married
398.28 “I certainly never told you that.” ¶“You might have done so] “I
certainly never told you anything of the sort.” ¶“You might have done so—so
far as opportunity went—
398.31 sometimes with a certain satisfaction] and sometimes with a certain
satisfaction
398.32 she did not wish to appear] she wished not to appear
398.34 she simply said] she simply returned
398.35 She let me know that you had declined an offer of marriage] She let me
know you had declined an offer of marriage
399.4 a face that persisted in not reflecting] a face which persisted in not
reflecting
399.9 her companion $...$ took her departure] her companion $...$ trium-
phantly withdrew
CHAPTER41
400.9 with the young girl] with her stepdaughter
400.11 she asked herself whether she might not leave the room] she asked
herself if she mightn’t leave the room
400.17 some form of exertion] some form of positive exertion
400.19 the conviction that unhappiness was a state of disease; it was suffering
as opposed to action. To act, to do something—it hardly mattered what] the
sense that unhappiness was a state of disease—of suffering as opposed to doing.
To “do”—it hardly mattered what
400.22 haunted by images of a flat want of zeal] haunted by visions of his
wife’s limpness under appeal
400.24 this nobleman was such a fine fellow] this nobleman was so sound a
character
400.27 to believe, sincerely, that she had been that] to believe sincerely, and
with proof of it, that she had been that
401.1 who evidently pleased himself greatly with the young girl. It was a little
odd that he should] who evidently pleased himself greatly with the charming
girl. It was a little “weird” he should
401.6 that was not what Lord Warburton had been looking for. Still, who
could say what men looked for?] that was not what he had been looking for.
Still, who could say what men ever were looking for?
401.10 it might seem odd that he cared for Pansy] it might seem odd he
should care for Pansy
401.11 so much as he supposed] so much as he had supposed
401.13 he should think that something of quite another sort might succeed]
he should think something of quite another sort might succeed
401.22 very tiresome that she should be so sure] very tiresome she should be
so sure
401.26 the young American was really so very flimsy] the young American
was really so light a weight
401.30 a very picturesque little peeress] a perfect little pearl of a peeress
401.32 Isabel had suddenly grown strangely cynical;] Mrs. Osmond had
grown of a sudden strangely cynical,
401.34 Somehow, an impediment $...$ could not present itself] An impedi-
ment $...$ could not anyhow present itself
402.3 but she inclined to think the young girl would not be tenacious, for she
had the faculty of assent developed in a very much higher degree than that of
resistance] but she inclined to see her as rather letting go, under suggestion,
than as clutching under deprecation—since she had certainly the faculty of
assent developed in a very much higher degree than that of protest
402.6 especially as she seemed quite to like him. She had expressed this
sentiment] especially as she seemed quite to like him; she had expressed this
sentiment
402.8 she said she thought his conversation most interesting] she had said
she thought his conversation most interesting
402.9 His manner to Pansy had been of the happiest;] His manner to Pansy
had been of the rightest and easiest—
402.12 as if she could understand everything.] as if she understood his
subjects with that sufficiency with which she followed those of the fash-
ionable operas. This went far enough for attention to the music and the
barytone.
402.13 he was as kind as he had been to Isabel herself at Gardencourt] he was
as kind as he had been to another fluttered young chit at Gardencourt
402.17 as complicated, as, later, her acceptance of Osmond] as complicated
as, later, her acceptance of Osmond had been
402.23 with sweet, attentive eyes] with sweet submissive eyes
402.28 he came no more at all to the Palazzo Roccanera] he came no more at all to Palazzo Roccanera
402.36 but she did not succeed in coming to the point] but she fell short of
the point
403.1 After all, she couldn’t; something held her and made it impossible.]
After all she couldn’t rise to it; something held her and made this impossible.
403.2 it would be base, insidious] it would be base or insidious
403.4 Isabel had all the qualities of her sex. It was a vague doubt] Isabel was
instinctively much more true than false to the common genius of her sex.
There was a vague doubt
403.8 Isabel asked herself whether she had prevented something] she won-
dered if she had prevented something
403.9 then she exclaimed] then she pronounced
403.10 when Lord Warburton wished her to go away] when their distin-
guished visitor should wish her to go away
403.12 Isabel said nothing] Isabel studiously said nothing
403.18 Her transparent little companion was for the moment rather opaque.
¶Isabel remained alone] Her transparent little companion was for the moment
not to be seen through. ¶She remained alone
403.20 He $...$ then sat down, looking at the fire] He $...$ then sat down; he
looked at the fire
403.21 Isabel now had transferred her eyes] she now had transferred her eyes
403.22 while he sat silent] while he kept his silence
403.33 Osmond had grown a little stouter since his marriage. He still, how-
ever, looked very distinguished.] Osmond had grown slightly stouter since his
marriage. He still, however, might strike one as very distinguished.
403.35 he stayed for half-an-hour] he stayed half an hour
404.10 I have so often failed in that.] I’ve so often failed of that.
404.22 the band of tapestry that Pansy had left] the band of tapestry Pansy
had left
404.28 You were afraid that I would plead for Mr. Rosier?] You were afraid
I’d plead for Mr. Rosier?
404.34 and with her husband] and that with her husband
405.12 My daughter has only to sit still, to become Lady Warburton.] My
daughter has only to sit perfectly quiet to become Lady Warburton.
405.22 nothing was a prize] nothing in life was a prize
405.26 he yearned for Lord Warburton, that if this nobleman should escape,
his equivalent might not be found; and] he yearned for Lord Warburton and
that if this nobleman should escape his equivalent might not be found; with
which moreover
405.29 though an hour before] and although an hour before
405.32 it would operate as a humiliation] it would operate as an humiliation
405.33 he was terribly capable of humiliating her] he was terribly capable of
humiliating her
406.5 It is very singular that Pansy’s admirers should all be your old friends.]
It’s very odd Pansy’s admirers should all be your old friends.
406.7 it is natural that they should fall in love] it’s natural they should fall
in love
406.11 she has only to sit still. Perhaps she won’t sit still;] she has only to sit
perfectly still. Perhaps she won’t sit perfectly still.
406.20 Isabel said] she went on
406.23 He has told me that it would be a great pleasure] He has told me it
would be a great pleasure
406.26 Then—“Why didn’t you tell me that?” he asked, quickly.] Then,
“Why didn’t you tell me that?” he asked sharply.
407.1 “So that he should act accordingly.” ¶“So that he should back out
$...$?” ¶“No, so that he should advance] “So that he might act accordingly.”
¶“So that he might back out $...$?” ¶“No, so that he might advance
407.5 when he made love to you] when he made love to you
407.7 she said simply] she returned
407.9 he took up a book and turned over the pages, while Isabel sat silent,
occupying herself with Pansy’s tapestry] he took up a book and fingered the
pages while she sat silent and occupied herself with Pansy’s tapestry
407.14 This was more disagreeable still; but Isabel felt it to be natural that her
husband should say it, and it was after all something very much of the same
sort that she had said to herself.] This was more offensive still; but she felt the
great naturalness of his saying it, and it was after all extremely like what she had
said to herself.
407.17 “I must not presume too much on that,” Isabel answered, gently.] “I
must not presume too much on that,” she replied.
407.20 “Well,” he said, “I hold that it lies in your hands.] “Well, I hold that it
lies in your hands.
407.21 remember that I count upon you] remember how much I count on you
CHAPTER42
08.1 She answered nothing,] She had answered nothing
408.4 that suddenly opened the door to agitation, so that she was afraid to
trust herself to speak] that suddenly made vibrations deep, so that she had been
afraid to trust herself to speak
408.4 After Osmond had gone,] After he had gone
408.6 in the silent drawing-room] in the still drawing-room
408.10 she had a peculiar influence on Lord Warburton, had given her] she
had a definite influence on Lord Warburton—this had given her
408.19 When he first came to Rome she believed that the link which united
them had completely snapped] When he had first come to Rome she believed
the link that united them to be completely snapped
408.20 it still had a palpable existence] it had yet a palpable existence
408.22 what she once thought of Lord Warburton she still thought] what she
once thought of him she always thought
408.23 it was needless that feeling should change; on the contrary, it seemed
to her a better feeling than ever] it was needless this feeling should change; it
seemed to her in fact a better feeling than ever
408.26 Isabel knew that she had read] Isabel knew she had read
409.3 knowing that he would do so] knowing he would do so
409.4 not for the young girl’s] not for the small creature’s own
409.7 the duty with which Isabel found herself confronted from the moment
that she admitted to herself that Lord Warburton had still an uneradicated
predilection] the duty with which she found herself confronted—from the
moment she admitted to herself that her old friend had still an uneradicated
predilection
409.10 to cultivate another satisfaction] to cultivate another satisfaction and
what might be called other chances
409.11 to believe that he was in good faith] to believe him in perfect good
faith
409.12 if his admiration for Pansy was a delusion,] if his admiration for Pansy
were a delusion
409.14 until she completely lost her way] until she had completely lost her way
409.19 until the contrary should be proved] till the contrary should be
proved
409.26 her husband and Madame Merle being in more direct communica-
tion] her husband’s being in more direct communication with Madame Merle
409.27 This impression] That impression
409.28 she wondered that it had never come before] she wondered it had
never come before
409.29 half-an-hour before] half an hour ago
409.36 This mistrust was the clearest result] This mistrust was now the
clearest result
410.13 and served to deepen the feeling of failure] and where it served to
deepen the feeling of failure
410.20 She flattered herself, however, that she had kept her failing faith to
herself] She flattered herself that she had kept her failing faith to herself,
however
410.22 she thought that he enjoyed it] she thought he enjoyed it
410.24 it was not till the first year of her marriage had closed that she took the
alarm. Then the shadows began to gather] it was not till the first year of their
life together, so admirably intimate at first, had closed that she had taken the
alarm. Then the shadows had begun to gather
410.27 But it steadily increased, and if here and there it had occasionally
lifted,] But it steadily deepened, and if now and again it had occasionally lifted
410.27 certain corners of her life] certain corners of her prospect
410.31 They were a part of her husband’s very presence.] They were a part,
they were a kind of creation and consequence, of her husband’s very
presence.
410.32 she accused him of nothing—that is, of but one thing, which was not a
crime] he accused him of nothing—that is but of one thing, which was not a
crime
410.33 no wrong that he had done] no wrong he had done
410.34 she simply believed that he hated her] she simply believed he
hated her
411.4 playing a part] wearing a mask or a dress
411.5 and he had made up his mind] and had made up his mind
411.6 that he would hurt her] he would hurt her
411.26 it was not wonderful that he succeeded. He succeeded because he was
sincere] it was not wonderful he had succeeded. He had succeeded because he
had been sincere
411.26 it never occurred to her] it never occurred to her now
411.30 She had a vision of him] She had had a more wondrous vision of him,
fed through charmed senses and oh such a stirred fancy!
411.32 the most striking of portraits] the most striking of figures
411.33 that was what interested her] that was what had interested her
411.34 There was an indefinable beauty] There had been an indefinable beauty
412.3 It was in all this that she found her occasion.] It was in all this she had
found her occasion.
412.5 And she loved him] And she had loved him, she had so anxiously and
yet so ardently given herself
412.6 for what she brought him] for what she brought him and what might
enrich the gift
412.7 the passion of those weeks] the passion of those full weeks
412.9 she came with full hands] she came with charged hands
412.10 she wouldn’t have done it] she would never have done it
412.11 this was a fact] this was the fantastic fact
412.13 some other conscience] some other conscience, to some more pre-
pared receptacle
412.15 the man who had the best taste] the man with the best taste
412.16 Unless she should give it to a hospital, there was nothing better she
could do with it] Unless she should have given it to a hospital there would have
been nothing better she could do with it
412.17 in which she was as much interested] in which she had been as much
interested
412.19 a certain grossness which attached to the good luck] a certain gross-
ness attaching to the good luck
412.27 Isabel’s cheek tingled] Isabel’s cheek burned
412.30 a certain feeling] a certain ardour
412.35 The finest individual she had ever known was hers; the simple
knowledge was a sort of act of devotion.] The finest—in the sense of being
the subtlest—manly organism she had ever known had become her property,
and the recognition of her having but to put out her hands and take it had
been originally a sort of act of devotion.
413.1 she had lived in it] she had lived in it
413.3 a firm hand to do it] a firm hand to seize her
413.4 A mind more ingenious, more subtle,] A mind more ingenious, more
pliant,
413.6 it was this exquisite instrument that she had now to reckon with] it was
this exquisite instrument she had now to reckon with
413.12 she had not noticed it; it came back] she had not noticed it: it had come
back
413.13 she might well notice it] she might well have noticed it
413.14 The words were nothing,] The words had been nothing
413.15 she looked into them, they appeared portentous] she had looked into
them they had then appeared portentous
413.16 He really meant it] He had really meant it
413.18 She knew she had too many ideas; she had more even than he
supposed] She had known she had too many ideas; she had more even than
he had supposed
413.19 when he asked her] when he had asked her
413.20 she liked him so much] she had liked him so much
413.23 It was not that] It had not been this
413.24 that was nothing] this had been nothing
413.26 What he meant was the whole thing] What he had meant had been the
whole thing
413.28 until he found himself] until he had found himself
413.32 his own was so different] his own had been so different
414.3 to find at least some happiness] find at least some happiness
414.4 that he loved the conventional] he loved the conventional
414.6 In that sense, the love of harmony $...$ and all the stately offices of life]
In that sense, that of the love of harmony $...$ and of all the stately offices of life
414.9 as the months elapsed, she followed him further and he led her into the
mansion of his own habitation, then, then she had seen] as the months had
elapsed, she had followed him further and he had led her into the mansion of
his own habitation, then, then she had seen
414.16 it was not physical suffering] it had not been physical suffering
414.23 when she knew him] when she had known him
415.5 a noble indifference] a grand indifference
415.9 For herself, the world had always interested her, and the study of her
fellow-creatures was her constant passion.] For herself, avowedly, the world
had always interested her and the study of her fellow creatures been her
constant passion.
415.19 Osmond deemed himself] he deemed himself
415.28 the old, the consecrated, and transmitted] the old, the consecrated, the
transmitted
415.33 though where he had got his traditions] though from what source he
had derived his traditions
415.34 after a little] and after a little
416.8 When Isabel saw this rigid system closing about her] When she saw this
rigid system close about her
416.10 she seemed to be shut up] she seemed shut up
416.17 The things that she had said] The things she had said
416.18 that he was ineffably ashamed] he was ineffably ashamed
416.22 or of a Unitarian preacher] or a Unitarian preacher
416.33 this was no very unwarrantable demand on the part of a husband] this
was no great insolence on the part of a man so accomplished and a husband
originally at least so tender
416.36 such a thing as purity] such a thing as chastity and even as decency
416.36 Osmond didn’t] Osmond was far from doing anything of the sort
417.7 deceptions which were not simply verbal] deceptions that were not
simply verbal
417.8 It was enough to find these facts assumed among Osmond’s traditions,]
It was enough to find these facts assumed among Osmond’s traditions—it was
enough
417.10 it was that that made him draw himself up] it was this that made him
draw himself up
417.11 that his wife should be] his wife should be
417.14 before she came to that] before she came to it
417.16 his ears scorched when he discovered that he had been too confident]
his ears had scorched on his discovering he had been too confident
417.17 to hate her!] to hate her.
417.20 comfort of Osmond’s life] comfort of his life
417.21 he had had a revelation that, after all, she could dispense with him] he
had had the revelation that she could after all dispense with him
417.24 upon him?] upon him?
417.27 the conviction that she had been living with] the certitude she had
been living with
417.29 what ought she to do?] what ought she to do?
417.34 it was an awful life] it was a horrible life
418.2 that it was indecent] it was indecent
418.5 but having to contain himself only deepened Osmond’s disgust] but
having had to contain himself had only deepened his disgust
418.8 as if Osmond had locked her into her bedroom—which she was sure he
wanted to do] as if Osmond had locked her into her room—which she was sure
was what he wanted to do
418.14 an everlasting weight upon her heart] an everlasting weight on her
heart
418.16 the hour that she sat with him her spirit rose] the hour that she sat with
him her ache for herself became somehow her ache for him
418.29 in their talk she was perpetually] she was perpetually, in their talk
418.31 when he warned her] when he had warned her
418.33 What a mystery! what a wonder of wisdom!] What a mystery, what a
wonder of wisdom!
419.14 in the soundless drawing-room] in the soundless saloon
419.25 the candles had burned] the candles burned
419.28 her husband and Madame Merle, grouped unconsciously and famil-
iarly] her husband and Madame Merle unconsciously and familiarly associated
CHAPTER43
420.4 and she had not extended] and had not extended
420.4 the interdict that she had seen placed] the interdict she had seen placed
420.7 Isabel thought that this was not likely] Isabel thought this unlikely
420.15 Isabel had rendered this service] Isabel had rendered her this service
420.17 she became aware that Edward Rosier was standing before her. He
had lost his affable smile,] she became aware of the near presence of Edward
Rosier. He stood before her; he had lost his affable smile
420.19 if she had not felt that at bottom his case was a hard one;] if she had
not felt his case to be at bottom a hard one:
420.21 that he was dangerous] he was dangerous
420.22 then he dropped his eyes] then dropped his eyes
421.11 You know that our acquaintance goes back] You know our acquain-
tance goes back
421.13 “Don’t make me out too old,” Isabel answered, smiling.] “Don’t make
me out too old,” Isabel patiently answered.
421.16 I should have refused you] I should have refused you on the spot
421.17 you think I’m a trifler!] you think me a mere Parisian trifler!
421.23 the movement struck him] the deficiency struck him
421.30 ¶“Would you $...$?” she said, in a low tone.] “Would you $...$?” she
finally asked in a low tone.
421.31 the little flower which he held] the little flower that he held
421.33 don’t you pity her a little?] don’t you pity her a little?
421.35 “It will depend $...$!” Rosier exclaimed.] “It will depend $...$!”
Mr. Rosier effectively said.
422.8 that he was very much in love] he was very much in love
422.9 and looked perfectly fresh] looking perfectly fresh
422.11 that she was counting] she was counting
422.17 that she perceived that her lover had abstracted a flower] she had
discovered her lover to have abstracted a flower
422.25 he formed the harmless habit] he had formed the harmless habit
422.31 my little maid] the little maid
423.3 a man of his importance] a man of his mettle
423.6 I shall like to dance with you] I should like to dance with you
423.13 If you dance with her,] If you danced with her
423.20 I am not sure that is a recreation.] I’m not sure it’s really a
recreation.
423.22 Won’t you really dance?] Will you absolutely not dance?
423.24 He was silent a moment.] He was silent a little.
423.27 how one cares for her] how one is charmed with her
423.34 Isabel laughed, and her companion smiled] She laughed, and her
companion did as much
424.3 she thought him delightful] she thought him pleasanter even than the
sum of his merits warranted
424.4 something in his friendship which appeared a kind of resource] some-
thing in his friendship that appeared a kind of resource
424.8 it did not please her that he should be too near to her] it didn’t suit her
that he should be too near her
424.10 it was in her] it might be in her
424.15 the dresses of young girls] the dresses of little maids
424.19 Her attention, her sympathy, were most active] Her attention, her
sympathy were immediate and active
424.21 Lord Warburton was trying] Lord Warburton might be trying
424.24 he was of course unconscious] he was of course unwitting
424.26 this $...$ made the situation none the less unacceptable] this $...$
made the situation none the less impossible
424.27 The sooner Lord Warburton should come to self-consciousness the
better.] The sooner he should get back into right relations with things the
better.
424.35 she knew that he knew that she liked him] she knew that he knew she
liked him
425.1 she knew that Pansy was also engaged] she knew Pansy to be also
engaged
425.2 a little fluttered look] a little fluttered flush
425.9 gracious alternation of concession and contraction] gracious alterna-
tions of concession and contraction
425.10 to think that she obeyed to the letter] to think she obeyed to the letter
425.13 Isabel found] she found
425.24 only because I like it!] only because I like it—!
425.30 looking up—“Please to let me understand.”] with her own raised:
“Please let me understand.”
426.1 Perhaps you forgot that.] Perhaps you forgot that.
426.13 “That I would dance with you? I told you I would dance nothing.”]
“That I would do it with you? I told you I’d do nothing.”
426.15 where we might sit down] where we may sit down
426.30 she knew that her husband desired] she knew her husband desired
426.36 if I can’t dance with her!] if I can’t dance with her!
427.9 who is in love with Pansy,” said Isabel.] who’s in love with Pansy.”
427.23 But my husband has larger ideas.] My husband, however, has larger
ideas.
428.3 Lord Warburton turned, suddenly, with a stare.] Lord Warburton
suddenly turned with a stare.
428.7 All the same, I like you for putting yourself in his place.] I like you,
however that may be, for putting yourself in his place.
428.10 that you are laughing at me] you’re laughing at me
428.12 But I like you, too.] But I like you as somebody to laugh at.
428.19 He hesitated a little] He waited a little
428.21 that I thought she did] I thought she did
428.22 A sudden blush sprung to his face.] A quick blush sprang to his brow.
428.23 that she would have no wish] she would have no wish
428.24 he would favour me—] he would favour me—!
428.24 He paused a little, and then he added—“Don’t you see?” suggestively,]
He paused a little and then suggested “Don’t you see?”
428.26 that she had an immense wish] she has an immense wish
428.30 the room continued to be empty] the room continued empty
429.9 Could anything in the world be more charming than Miss Osmond?”
¶“Nothing, possibly.] Could any one in the world be more loveable than Miss
Osmond?” ¶“No one, possibly.
429.15 I am forty years old] I’m forty-two years old
429.19 he turned quickly to his companion] he turned quickly to his friend
429.20 She met his eye] She met his eyes
429.22 she saw in his eye] she saw in his expression
429.23 she was perhaps even frightened] she was perhaps even in fear
429.23 It expressed a suspicion] It showed a suspicion
429.24 what she wished to know] what she wanted to know
429.25 that she detected in his wish to marry her step-daughter] her of
detecting in his proposal of marrying her step-daughter
429.27 or that if she did detect it she thought it alarming or compromising]
or of thinking it, on such a betrayal, ominous
429.33 where she encountered several acquaintances] where, within her com-
panion’s view, she was immediately addressed by a pair of gentlemen, high
personages in the Roman world, who met her as if they had been looking for her
429.34 regretting that she had moved] regretting she had moved
430.4 “I need it,” the young man murmured] “I need it,” the young man
softly wailed
430.10 an inconvenience in the doorways!] an inconvenience in doorways!
CHAPTER44
431.12 visits to a city] visits to a place
431.14 a habitation] an habitation
431.15 to go there] to visit that city
431.21 reasons, however, which do not closely concern us] reasons, however,
that do not closely concern us
431.27 none at least one had heard of] none at least that one had heard of
431.29 sure that his wife] sure his wife
432.1 to the church-ceremonies and the scenery] to the monuments and
museums, the church ceremonies and the scenery
432.5 the hospitality of the Palazzo Roccanera] the hospitality of Palazzo
Roccanera
432.9 But her husband wouldn’t let her] It was her husband who wouldn’t
let her
432.17 she had a patch of common ground somewhere, which they would set
their feet] she had somewhere a patch of common ground that they would set
their feet
432.18 they would both know] they should both know
432.19 they touched it] they had really touched it
432.21 “look down” upon her] “look down” on her
432.22 when it would begin; not that she cared much;] when it would begin,
like fire-works, or Lent, or the opera season; not that she cared much,
432.30 she was like a bright shell, with a polished surface] she was like a
bright rare shell, with a polished surface and a remarkably pink lip
433.2 like a wedding-cake] like a frosted wedding-cake
433.5 at the Palazzo Roccanera] at Palazzo Roccanera
433.29 the only woman of letters she had ever encountered. That is, the only
modern one] the only woman of letters she had ever encountered—that is, the
only modern one
433.33 she wondered whether Miss Stackpole] she wondered if Miss
Stackpole
433.36 more modern] more contemporary
434.3 Her mother used to wear] Her mother had been used to wear
434.4 a pair of bare shoulders, and a gold laurel-wreath] a pair of shoulders
timorously bared of their tight black velvet (oh the old clothes!) and a gold
laurel-wreath
434.6 She spoke softly and vaguely, with a kind of Southern accent] She had
spoken softly with the accent of her “Creole” ancestors, as she always confessed
434.9 her appearance, and her manner was almost conscientiously familiar.]
her appearance; her manner was almost conscientiously familiar. It was as
impossible to imagine her ever vaguely sighing as to imagine a letter posted
without its address.
434.11 the correspondent $...$ was much more efficient] the correspondent
$...$ was much more in the movement
434.12 ¶Henrietta explained that she had come to see the Countess] She
explained that she had called on the Countess
434.17 Henrietta would not have gone to see her, for Mrs. Touchett]
Henrietta would not have put herself out for her, since Mrs. Touchett
434.19 the Countess asked, smiling graciously] the Countess graciously asked
434.26 I wish I had known it.] I wish I had known it at the time.
435.5 a kind of disgrace to be put into the papers] a kind of scandal to be put
in the papers
435.8 with soft dryness] with bland dryness
435.9 to come and see you] to come to see you
435.32 at a pension.”] at a pension. She gave no reason.”
435.35 ¶“That’s Osmond,” she remarked, pregnantly. ¶“Isabel ought to
resist,”] “The reason’s Osmond,” she pregnantly remarked. ¶“Isabel ought to
make a stand,”
436.2 the Countess added, ingenuously] the Countess ingenuously added
436.23 I should not have gone if she had asked me] I should not have gone if
she had asked me
436.29 all sorts of smart people] all sorts of brilliant people
436.30 Do you consider him very smart?] Do you consider him very
brilliant?
437.12 and she presently expressed it] and presently expressed it
437.16 Henrietta inquired, softly] Henrietta enquired with unprecedented
distinctness
437.18 that all the nice men do it] all the nice men do it
437.22 Do you mean that Isabel is guilty—is guilty—” and she paused] Do
you mean that Isabel’s guilty—guilty—?” And she paused
437.24 Lord Warburton is, as I hear,] Lord Warburton, as I hear, is
437.26 I am very anxious] I’m just anxious
437.29 I will engage] I engage
437.31 the deeper solemnity of her eyes] the deeper solemnity of her gaze
437.33 the idea that you seem to suppose] the idea you seem to suppose
438.3 ¶Miss Stackpole had begun to bore her a little.] Miss Stackpole had
begun a little to bore her.
438.8 if Osmond isn’t enjoying himself] if Osmond isn’t amusing himself—in
his own old way—
438.18 if she is miserable she has at least made him so] if she is miserable she
has at least made him so
438.20 that she had no desire] she had no desire
438.23 a narrower circle than she had imagined.] a narrower circle than she
had imagined, though with a capacity for coarseness even there.
438.24 ¶“It will be better if they love each other,” she said, gravely.] “It will be
better if they love each other,” she said for edification.
438.26 it only increases my fear] it only aggravates my fear
438.30 “It may be that I can’t assist her,” said Miss Stackpole] “It may be I
can’t assist her,” Miss Stackpole pursued
438.36 with her small bright eyes and her eager-looking nose; a flush had
come into each of her cheeks.] with small bright eyes and an eager-looking
nose; with cheeks into each of which a flush had come.
439.2 c’est bien gentil!” she said. “Isn’t that what they call friendship?”] c’est
bien gentil! Isn’t it what they call friendship?”
439.8 No one would do for me] No one, man or woman, would do for me
439.16 she could not give a fictitious representation] she could give no
fictitious representation
439.18 On quitting the Countess she took her way] On quitting her she took
the way
439.19 the bright-faced hotels] the bright-faced inns
439.35 it might be handed to him] it might be handed him
439.36 took her course] pursued her course
440.13 Henrietta had taken a great fancy] Henrietta had a special devotion
440.16 but she had reminded herself] and yet reminded herself
440.31 Goodwood said] Goodwood stated
440.32 but he was not enthusiastic] but not enthusiastic
440.35 She asked him first, however,] She asked him first, none the less,
441.6 about Correggio that she wished to talk] about Correggio she wished
to talk
441.14 he said, rather loud] he said rather loudly
441.17 he said, in the tone of a man quite conscious of his own reason-
ableness] he went on in the tone of a man quite conscious of his patience
441.20 I would gladly do you one] I’d gladly do you one
441.26 Henrietta went on] Henrietta continued
441.29 if I have ever annoyed you (and I think sometimes that I have), it is
because I knew that I was willing] if I’ve ever annoyed you (and I think
sometimes I have) it’s because I knew I was willing
441.30 But I would take trouble for you.] But I’d take trouble for you.
441.34 Goodwood exclaimed,] he answered
442.2 as far as this] so far as this
442.6 “Best for whom, do you mean?” Goodwood inquired.] “Best for whom,
do you mean?” Goodwood demanded.
442.8 it won’t do her any good!] it won’t do her any good!
442.9 do her harm] do her some harm
442.18 “Why do you say more so?”] “Why do you say ‘more’ so?”
442.31 that is the question] that’s the real issue
442.36 she turned away] she turned off
443.2 then, after a moment,] but after a moment
443.3 he said in a moment] he then resumed
443.7 after a moment’s hesitation] after thinking some minutes
443.9 said Goodwood] he said
443.14 Goodwood hesitated] Goodwood hung back
443.22 social progress] social prosperity
443.24 wish that Miss Stackpole did not take] wish Miss Stackpole didn’t take
443.35 He wished to go] He desired to go
444.1 in a vice] in a vise
444.6 it seemed to him] it struck him
444.14 then he said, without any of the richness of gallantry,] then said,
wholly without the flourish of gallantry
444.17 Henrietta remarked, serenely] Henrietta returned imperturbably
CHAPTER45
445.2 Isabel knew that her husband was displeased] Isabel knew her husband
to be displeased
445.2 This knowledge] That knowledge
445.6 Osmond’s displeasure] Osmond’s opposition
445.10 she partook of this refreshment in spite of her husband’s disapproval;
that is, she partook of it] she partook of this refreshment in spite of her
husband’s aversion to it, that is partook of it
445.12 Osmond’s wishes; he was her master] his wishes; he was her appointed
and inscribed master
445.16 for when she gave herself away] for on giving herself away
445.18 She seemed to see, however,] She seemed to see, none the less,
445.20 something that she had solemnly given] something she had solemnly
bestown
445.22 upon her] upon her to the end
445.23 to go and see Ralph] to call upon Ralph
445.27 to be just, she didn’t see how he could like her] she didn’t, to be just,
see how he could like her
445.29 Osmond’s objections were none the less founded. If Osmond should
positively interpose, then she should have to decide] Osmond’s sore, mute
protest was none the less founded. If he should positively interpose, if he
should put forth his authority, she would have to decide
446.1 to avoid open rupture with her husband] to avoid open rupture
446.1 wishing that Ralph would start] wishing Ralph would start
446.12 there is no substitute for that success] there was no conceivable
substitute for that success
446.14 the measure of expediency resided in her moral consciousness. It had
been very liberal to-day] the measure of propriety was in the canon of taste,
and there couldn’t have been a better proof that morality was, so to speak, a
matter of earnest appreciation. Isabel’s application of that measure had been
particularly free to-day
446.19 ¶“I want you to answer me a question,” she said.] “I want you to
answer me a question.”
446.21 I think I know it] I think I guess your question
446.23 “It’s very possible,” said Isabel.] “Very possibly you guess it.
446.25 said Isabel] she said
446.36 Ralph looked at her a moment; a shade of perplexity mingled with his
mild hilarity. ¶“You said that] Ralph looked at her as if his mild hilarity had
been touched with mystification. “You say that
447.6 Isabel stared a little.] Isabel stared.
447.7 he desires to marry Pansy] he wants, of all things in the world, to marry
Pansy
447.11 that he did] he did
447.12 Ralph hesitated a moment] Ralph waited a moment
447.16 “That would be very tiresome,” Isabel said, speaking, as she flattered
herself,] “That would be very tiresome.” She spoke, as she flattered herself,
447.25 upon which] on which
447.27 ¶“Ah, Ralph, you give me no help!” she cried, abruptly, passionately.]
“Ah, Ralph, you give me no help!” she cried abruptly and passionately.
448.2 I can’t undertake to help him.”] I can’t undertake to see him through.”
448.4 Isabel hesitated a moment.] Isabel debated.
448.7 I suspect that] I seem to see that
448.11 She cares for some one else,] She cares for another person
448.18 He has the merit of being in love with her.] He has the merit—for
Pansy—of being in love with Pansy.
448.28 than Osmond] than Gilbert
448.29 “Take an interest $...$ you mean.”] “Take an interest $...$ you
mean?”
449.12 at least that he knew it] at least how he judged for her and how he
knew
449.13 Isabel would know it much better] Isabel would know much better
449.14 that he was not deceived] he was not deceived
449.25 she scarcely understood] she scarce understood
449.28 that she was nervous] she was nervous
450.9 and you’ll see,” said Ralph] and you’ll see,” he answered
450.11 she made no answer; she only shook her hand out of his own $...$ and
rapidly went out of the room] she made no reply; she only pulled her hand out
of his own $...$ and rapidly withdrew from the room
450.13 the young girl’s room] the girl’s room
450.21 The rooms in the Palazzo Roccanera] The rooms in Palazzo
Roccanera
450.27 betraying it to Pansy] betraying this heat
450.29 of frightening her] of causing alarm
450.30 Pansy seemed to have guessed that she had come a little as a con-
fessor] Pansy seemed to have guessed she had come more or less as a confessor
451.7 vaguely shining] dimly shining
451.15 Pansy $...$ raised her face $...$ nearer to Isabel’s] Pansy $...$ raised
her face $...$ nearer
451.18 Isabel rejoined] Isabel returned
451.20 act upon it] act on it
451.30 “Ah, yes,” said Pansy, eagerly] “Ah yes,” said the child eagerly
451.35 “Will you do everything I desire?”] “Will you do everything I want?”
452.1 the only thing she wished] the only thing she wanted
452.3 that she would do so] she would do so
452.5 “Very well, then, it’s impossible,” said Isabel.] “Very well then, it’s
impossible,” Isabel pronounced.
452.9 Pansy, sighing then, told her that she had attempted this feat] Pansy,
sighing at this, told her that she had attempted that feat
452.11 those that think of you] those who think of you
452.12 that Mr. Rosier thinks of me] Mr. Rosier thinks of me
452.15 that I think of him] I think of him
452.17 there is none for you!”] there is none for you.”
452.24 “Ah, but I don’t admit Mr. Rosier’s right,” Isabel cried, hypocritically.]
“Ah, but I don’t admit Mr. Rosier’s right!” Isabel hypocritically cried.
452.25 Pansy only gazed at her; she was evidently deeply puzzled] Pansy only
gazed at her, evidently much puzzled
452.27 the miserable consequences] the wretched consequences
452.35 it did not lead] it failed to lead
452.35 towards her father] toward her father
453.4 Mr. Rosier’s fortune is not very large.] Mr. Rosier’s fortune is not at all
large.
453.6 I have very little money] I have myself so little money
453.8 Isabel was grateful] With which Isabel was grateful
453.10 She was doing this for Osmond; this was what one had to do] It was
what she was doing for Osmond; it was what one had to do
453.11 that she had made] she had made
453.13 said Pansy, softly] her companion softly demanded
453.15 Isabel pusillanimously took refuge in a generalisation] Isabel took
refuge in timorous vagueness
453.21 Pansy’s eyes] The child’s eyes
453.22 that she was doubting] she was doubting
453.25 and then she said, with a timorous sigh—¶“Well, I hope no one will
ask me!”] and then quavered out: “Well, I hope no one will ask me!”
453.29 that he would succeed] he’d succeed
453.33 she said] she resumed
454.2 if you mean that he will ask me to marry him,] if you mean that he’ll
propose for me
454.5 Lord Warburton won’t ask me] Lord Warburton won’t propose
454.14 which made Isabel feel very awkward] which conduced to Isabel’s
awkwardness
454.23 that he knows that] of his knowing that
454.30 Ah no, there is no danger!] Ah no, there’s no danger.
454.35 “I think I would rather not,” Pansy answered.] “I think I’d rather not,”
Pansy unreservedly answered.
455.4 said Pansy, very lucidly] said the child very lucidly
455.6 it made Isabel draw a long breath] it made her companion draw a long
breath
455.6 It relieved her] It relieved this friend
CHAPTER46
456.17 “I don’t know,” said Isabel.] “I don’t know,” Isabel was reduced to
replying.
456.20 Isabel answered] She answered
456.25 Isabel hesitated a moment.] She just faltered.
456.30 “Should you like me to write to him?” Isabel asked.] “Should you like
me to write to him?” she demanded.
457.6 If you really wish to capture Lord Warburton, you must do it yourself.]
If you really wish hands laid on Lord Warburton you must lay them yourself.
457.14 That was the expression of his eyes now.] That effect had never been so
marked as now.
457.14 she said] she returned
457.15 If he doesn’t come up to the mark] If he doesn’t after all come forward
457.19 “I told you I would do what I could,” said Isabel.] “I told you I would
do what I could,” she went on.
57.22 How much you must wish to capture him!] How much you must want
to make sure of him!”
457.30 Osmond expressed nothing] He expressed nothing
457.31 “Yes, I wish it very much.”] “Yes, I want it immensely.”
457.32 a servant came in, as if to usher] a servant came in to usher
458.8 ¶“No,” said Lord Warburton, smiling] “No,” he explained, smiling
458.9 then he explained] then he mentioned
458.10 on the morrow or next day] on the morrow or the day after
458.14 Her eyes were upon Lord Warburton’s face] Her eyes were on their
visitor’s face
458.17 had she met her visitor’s glance, she should have found it expressive]
had she met his glance she would have found it expressive
458.21 for a quarter of an hour] a quarter of an hour
458.23 a course which he strongly recommended] a course he strongly
recommended
458.27 an absurd state of things] an absurd state of things for a man of his
leisure and intelligence
458.29 she had there] she had had there
459.7 she would be immensely liked in England, Miss Osmond would] she
would be an immense success there, she certainly would
459.10 he had not said good-bye to any one] he hadn’t said good-bye to a
two-legged creature
459.11 a final interview] final interviews
459.16 Such a sense was bewildering; it made one nervous.] Such a sense was
upsetting; it muddled one’s wits.
459.23 the circumstances of his visit] the conditions of his visit
459.30 Isabel perceived that it was not in her husband’s power] Isabel felt it
out of her husband’s power
459.31 A double operation] A complex operation
459.32 she listened to Lord Warburton] she listened to their visitor
460.3 he treated Lord Warburton,] he treated their friend
460.9 intent upon Lord Warburton] intent on this prize
460.12 not for Gilbert Osmond’s] not for any profit to a person already so
generally, so perfectly provided as Gilbert Osmond
460.21 Lord Warburton’s friendly offers] the other’s friendly offers
460.27 if their visitor’s movements] if the leave-taker’s movements
460.28 Their visitor did well] The latter did well
460.31 He had beneficent inclinations;] He had had beneficent inclinations,
461.18 Isabel will talk] Mrs. Osmond will talk
461.20 he terminated this little speech,] he wound up this little speech
461.20 a rather meagre form] rather a meagre form
461.27 Lord Warburton showed] her friend showed
461.34 “I don’t wonder at it,” said Lord Warburton.] “I don’t wonder at it,” he
returned.
462.6 To see you under my roof”—and he hesitated a moment—“would be a
great satisfaction.”] To see you under my roof”—and he hung fire but an
instant—“would be a great satisfaction.”
462.14 The young girl’s voice trembled a little.] Her voice perceptibly
trembled.
462.22 remember—” and Lord Warburton stammered] remember—” And
her interlocutor stammered
462.23 “Think of me sometimes, you know,”] “Think of me sometimes, you
know!”
462.25 Isabel expected an effusion of tears] she expected an effusion of tears
463.3 Osmond could not put himself] he couldn’t put himself
463.7 whether he meant it] if he meant it
463.10 Isabel was about to follow] She was about to follow
463.23 “I haven’t the least idea what you mean,” said Isabel.] “I haven’t the
least idea what you mean,” she returned.
464.12 That, however, is a detail.] That indeed is a detail.
464.17 he asked, suddenly] he suddenly asked
464.34 she rejoined in a moment] she returned in a moment
465.1 Of preventing Pansy’s marriage] Of having prevented Pansy’s marriage
465.11 “Where is the letter that you told me he had written me?” her husband
asked.] “Where’s the letter you told me he had written me?” her husband
demanded.
465.16 “Oh, Osmond, for a man who was so fine!”] “Oh, Gilbert, for a man
who was so fine—!”
465.22 a man who tried to marry his daughter to a lord, but didn’t succeed] a
man who has tried to marry his daughter to a lord, but has grotesquely failed
465.23 “Pansy doesn’t care for him; she is very glad he is gone,” said Isabel.]
“Pansy doesn’t care for him. She’s very glad he’s gone,” Isabel said.
465.34 He looked at her a moment, and then he turned] He looked at her a
moment; then he turned
466.7 to bewilder me] to stupefy me
466.9 turning away with her candle] as she turned away with her candle
CHAPTER47
467.2 learned that Caspar Goodwood had come] learned how Caspar
Goodwood had come
467.3 This latter event] This latter fact
467.10 she seemed to see her husband and Madame Merle] she seemed to see
her husband and her friend—his friend—
467.13 her brilliant friend] the charming woman
467.16 to inform her of this fact] to make it known to her
467.21 the most inharmonious survival] the most discordant survival
467.24 He left her, that morning, with the sense of an unnecessary shock;] He
had left her that morning with a sense of the most superfluous of shocks:
467.26 to steer skilfully] to steer wide
467.29 painful to see him] horrid to see him
467.31 claim upon her] claim on her
468.1 a great reality] a grim reality
468.2 She cried with rage] She had cried with rage
468.3 it was at his want of consideration] it had been at his want of
consideration
468.5 these pure rays] those pure rays
468.6 there was a violence in that] there had been a violence in the
impression
468.6 There was a violence] There had been a violence
468.8 and that after-sense of it which lasted for three or four days] and in that
after-sense of the same which had lasted three or four days
468.10 The effect of Caspar Goodwood’s visit faded away, and during the first
year of Isabel’s marriage he dropped out of her books.] The effect of his final
appeal had in short faded away, and all the first year of her marriage he had
dropped out of her books.
468.12 a person who was unhappy on your account and whom you could do
nothing to relieve] a person who was sore and sombre about you and whom
you could yet do nothing to relieve
468.13 his unhappiness] his unreconciled state
468.17 Caspar Goodwood had great compensations] here was a sufferer who
had compensations
468.18 his compensations,] Mr. Goodwood’s compensations
468.27 meeting it in one’s meditations always a sort of shock] meeting it in
memory or in apprehension a peculiar concussion
468.29 social drapery which muffles the sharpness of human contact] social
drapery commonly muffling, in an overcivilized age, the sharpness of human
contacts
468.33 nothing about Boston; her imagination was confined within the limits
of Manhattan] nothing of Boston—her imagination was all bounded on the
east by Madison Avenue
468.33 Isabel thought of him] Isabel had thought of him
468.34 she had more than once] she had had more than once
469.2 Caspar Goodwood’s disappointment] the young man’s disappointment
469.3 she believed, to convey it] she had believed, to convey it
469.4 but little interest] little interest
469.5 When it came to the point she never wrote to him] When it had come
to the point she had never written to him
469.9 her marriage became vivid] her actual union had grown vivid
469.10 that particular reflection $...$ had not the assurance] that particular
reflection $...$ had not had the assurance
469.11 But when she found herself in trouble he became a member] But on
finding herself in trouble he had become a member
469.13 I have related how passionately she desired to feel] I have mentioned
how passionately she needed to feel
469.18 there was an account still to be settled with Caspar Goodwood; it
seemed to her that she would settle it to-day on terms easy for him.] there was
an account still to be settled with Caspar, and she saw herself disposed or able
to settle it to-day on terms easier for him than ever before.
469.19 that he was coming] he was coming
469.19 she felt afraid] she felt all afraid
469.20 to learn that she was unhappy] to make out—since he would make it
out, as over a falsified balance-sheet or something of that sort—the intimate
disarray of her affairs
469.23 to conceal her misery] to conceal her stress
469.28 proving that she had not] proving she had not
469.29 the more so that the years] the more so as the years
469.32 and were striking enough to give friendship a spice of heroism] and
which were still marked enough to give loyalty a spice of heroism
469.34 Her eye had lost none of its serenity, her toilet none of its crispness]
Her remarkably open eyes, lighted like great glazed railway-stations, had put
up no shutters; her attire had lost none of its crispness
469.34 national flavour] national reference
469.36 it seemed to Isabel that she had grown restless] it struck Isabel she had
grown vague
470.1 Of old she had never been restless; though she was perpetually in
motion it was impossible to be more deliberate.] Of old she had never been
vague; though undertaking many enquiries at once, she had managed to be
entire and pointed about each.
470.12 the actual episode] her present act
470.13 of one’s knowing all about it, of one’s having] of her knowing all about
it, of her having
470.17 Isabel] Her friend
470.18 her friend’s fidelity] the other’s fidelity
470.19 she guessed] she had guessed
470.24 but she had insisted] and had yet insisted
470.25 Isabel found] she found
470.26 confessing to Henrietta] confessing to this confidant
470.27 she was not contented] she was not in the least at her ease
470.29 being miserable] being wretched
470.31 “Yes, I am miserable,” she said, very gently.] “Yes, I’m wretched,” she
said very mildly.
470.36 “He’s very difficult!”] “He’s very hard to please!”
471.11 You have changed] You have changed
471.12 that you like him] you like him
471.13 Isabel hesitated a moment.] Isabel debated.
471.14 I can’t tell all the world.] I can’t announce it on the housetops.
471.15 Henrietta gave a rich laugh] Henrietta gave a laugh
471.18 surprising that Gilbert Osmond] surprising Gilbert Osmond
471.20 the conjugal mansion] the conjugal roof
471.21 he said to Isabel] he had said to Isabel
471.22 Isabel answered] Isabel had answered
471.35 bring herself to think favourably] teach herself to think favourably
472.1 unnatural and even sinister] unnatural and even uncanny
472.9 to dine at the Palazzo Roccanera] to dine at Palazzo Roccanera
472.13 to wish that Henrietta] to wish the lady from New York
473.10 my hat!] my hat.
473.13 She let Isabel know] She let her friend know
473.19 to contemplate] to take in
473.21 he walked] he had walked
473.25 something that made her feel afresh that it was rather terrible] some-
thing that made her feel it afresh to be rather terrible
473.27 he certainly was lofty enough] he certainly reached high enough
473.35 that he was when he came] as he had been when he came
473.36 He was very much liked over there] He had been very much liked in
most places
474.2 There were some people thought] There were people who had thought
474.7 the school-system; it seemed really too much] the great school system;
it had been really too much
474.8 he had appeared] he had behaved
474.8 too much] too much of everything
474.9 take a small part] take in a small part
474.10 He seemed really fascinated] He had seemed really fascinated
474.20 though he was obliged to confess] though obliged to confess
474.26 she had told him that she expected it was the greatest he had ever
experienced] she had told him she indeed expected it was the biggest he had
ever experienced
474.36 on the contrary, she remembered one day] she remembered on the
contrary one day
475.1 all walking round] walking all round
475.6 The mystery of that] The mystery about that
475.8 to the Palazzo Roccanera] to Palazzo Roccanera
475.13 who would take $...$ or nothing] who would take $...$ or take
nothing
475.14 asked no questions] raised no questions
475.16 and made him say] made him say
475.17 But she also saw, so she believed] 1883 But she also saw, as she
believed
475.29 he had never been demonstrative, and Isabel had every reason to
believe that he was satisfied] he had never been loose and easy and she had
every reason to believe he was satisfied
475.32 He had little conversation upon general topics] He was open to little
conversation on general topics
475.34 He spoke a good deal in Rome] He spoke a good deal now
475.35 how much there was to talk about] how much there was in Rome to
talk about
476.1 if Osmond didn’t like] if Mr. Osmond didn’t like
476.2 save having been] save as having been
476.3 he was an old friend] he was the very oldest
476.4 introduce him to Osmond] introduce him to Gilbert
476.15 one had to be almost equally honest with him. Isabel made this latter
reflection] one had to be almost equally honest with him. She made this latter
reflection
476.15 that she had persuaded] she had persuaded
476.19 being counted upon] being counted on
476.25 under a tall belfry] under some tall belfry
476.33 Osmond asked him] Gilbert asked him
476.34 Goodwood smoked] Mr. Goodwood smoked
476.35 Osmond said to Isabel] Gilbert said to Isabel
476.36 he was as strong as an English portmanteau] he was as strong and of
as good a style as an English portmanteau,—he had plenty of straps and
buckles which would never wear out, and a capital patent lock
477.24 they became excellent friends, and Henrietta wondered that she
should never have like him before] they became excellent friends, Henrietta
much wondering that she should never have like him before
477.28 On the other hand, Mr. Bantling was a great resource] Mr. Bantling
on the other hand proved a great resource
477.33 alone with Touchett,] alone with his host
477.34 other matters they could talk about] other matters they could
take up
478.2 as many dangers as his host] as many dangers as Ralph
478.2 He felt very sorry for Ralph] He felt very sorry for that unclassable
personage
478.3 a pleasant man so helpless] a pleasant man, so pleasant for all his
queerness, so beyond anything to be done
478.5 There was help in Goodwood, when once the fountain had been
tapped; and he repeated several times] There was always something to be
done, for Goodwood, and he did it in this case by repeating several times
478.6 she had disposed] she had artfully disposed
478.11 that Ralph should leave Rome] that Ralph should depart
478.13 She had a constant fear that he would die there, and a horror of this
event occurring at an inn, at her door, which she had so rarely entered.] She
had a constant fear he would die there before her eyes and a horror of the
occurrence of this event at an inn, by her door, which he had so rarely entered.
478.17 something sacred about Gardencourt] something sacred in
Gardencourt
478.22 her little fibs] her falsehoods
478.23 the strange memory of her lovers] the strange, the unholy legend of
the number of her lovers
CHAPTER48
479.7 that you can’t go] you can’t go
479.12 “Are there any women among them?” Miss Stackpole inquired,
calmly.] “Are there any women among them?” Miss Stackpole desired to know.
479.15 “Well,” said Henrietta, tranquilly] “Well,” said Henrietta calmly
479.24 he slowly resumed his former posture] he slowly relapsed
480.13 that he could stretch] he could stretch
480.14 he wished to die] he wanted to die
480.25 “Granting that, she is kind,” said Ralph, smiling.] “Granting that, she’s
kind,” smiled Ralph.
481.9 “Trying to see whether she’s happy.”] “Trying to make out if she’s
happy.”
481.10 “That’s easy to see,” said Ralph] “That’s easy to make out,” said Ralph
481.16 he continued, in a strange voice] he continued with a harsh ring in his
voice
481.25 I think it is right] I think it right
481.30 The Countess stared, and then gave an inconsiderate laugh. ¶“Is that
the story] The Countess stared, and then with an inconsiderate laugh: “Is that
the story
482.7 what he is capable of] what your brother’s capable of
482.8 encouraging Lord Warburton] encouraging Warburton
482.17 the offer she had made to Ralph,] the offer she had made Ralph
482.19 Ralph and Henrietta] Ralph and this young woman
482.21 ¶“I don’t care whether he understands me or not,” said Henrietta.] “I
don’t care whether he understands me or not,” Henrietta declared.
482.28 so long as you have go so much company] so long as you’ve so much
company
482.30 “Do you call it a comedy, Isabel Archer?” Henrietta inquired,
severely.] “Do you call it a comedy, Isabel Archer?” Henrietta rather grimly
asked.
482.33 Henrietta contemplated her a while.] Henrietta engaged in this act for
a while.
483.16 a woman leaving her husband] a woman’s leaving her husband
483.22 train that he might designate] train he might designate
483.28 with a quick smile—¶“My dear Ralph!”] with a quick smile: “My dear
Ralph—!”
484.12 ¶“Henrietta is my greatest precaution,” Ralph said.] “Henrietta’s my
greatest precaution,” he went on.
484.23 “That’s why I don’t go,” said Isabel, simply, but not very lucidly.]
“That’s why I don’t go,” said Isabel simply—yet not very lucidly.
484.34 “Afraid of your husband?” he said, jocosely. ¶“Afraid of myself!” said
Isabel, getting up.] “Afraid of your husband?” ¶“Afraid of myself!” she said,
getting up.
484.35 then she added—] then added:
485.1 “Ah, yes,” said Ralph, laughing] “Ah yes,” laughed Ralph
485.6 There is nothing left for Mr. Goodwood!” ¶Isabel coloured, and then
she declared,] There is nothing left for Mr. Goodwood.” ¶She coloured and
then observed,
485.21 to the Palazzo Roccanera] to Palazzo Roccanera
485.25 lounging and chatting] 1883 lounging and chattering
485.29 like a man whose perceptions had been quickened] as a man whose
perceptions have been quickened
485.30 he was very sorry] he was sorry
486.1 and yet you are not at all flimsy] and yet are not at all common
486.12 Now, we have liked you——” And Osmond hesitated] Now, we’ve
liked you—!” With which he hesitated
486.18 She speaks for me; why shouldn’t I speak for her?] She speaks for me,
my wife; why shouldn’t I speak for her?
486.26 something that saved you] something about you that saved you
486.34 he chose for once to be a little vulgar,] he chose to use the tone of
patronage with a grossness not in his habits
487.3 perfectly modulated voice] perfectly-pitched voice
487.9 Osmond had won] His host had won
487.12 to like him] to think well of him
487.15 He accepted him as a rather brilliant personage] He accepted him as
rather a brilliant personage
487.21 his successful rival had a fantastic streak in his composition] his
triumphant rival had in his composition a streak of perversity
487.23 and he could afford] and could afford
487.25 Goodwood at times had wished Osmond were dead,] Goodwood had
at times grimly wished he were dead
487.27 practice had made Goodwood quite perfect] practice had made the
younger man perfect
487.32 That was all he had an ear for] ¶That was all he had had an ear for
487.33 he was conscious] he had been conscious
487.35 the conjugal harmony which prevailed at the Palazzo Roccanera] the
conjugal harmony prevailing at Palazzo Roccanera
487.35 He was more careful] He had been more careful
488.2 intention which puzzled] intention that had puzzled
488.10 she had ceased] she had pretty well ceased
488.24 the angry pain] the harshness
488.26 as far as she was concerned] so far as she was concerned
488.29 He was hopeless, he was helpless, he was superfluous.] He was hope-
less, helpless, useless.
488.29 To this last fact] To this last character
488.34 one that would have kept him in Rome!] one that would have kept
him in Rome.
489.1 as superfluous as ever] as little wanted as ever
489.2 she was imperturbable, impenetrable] she was imperturbable, inscru-
table, impenetrable
489.4 he knew that there are disappointments which last] he knew there are
disappointments that last
489.7 Osmond had a kind of demoniac imagination] the man had a kind of
demonic imagination
489.9 whether he were demoniac] whether he were demonic
489.10 without Goodwood’s gaining by it] without one’s gaining a straw
one’s self
489.12 ¶“You travel, by the by, with Touchett,” Osmond said. “I suppose
that means that you will move slowly?”] “You travel, by the by, with
Ralph Touchett,” Osmond said. “I suppose that means you’ll move
slowly?”
489.22 “I have nothing else to do,” said Caspar, dryly.] “I’ve nothing else to
do,” Caspar said dryly.
489.26 “Do you find that as a married man you are so much occupied?”] “Do
you find that as a married man you’re so much occupied?” the young man
mechanically asked.
489.31 If you are ever bored, get married.] If you’re ever bored take my advice
and get married.
490.7 That’s a little nude] That’s a little bleak
490.11 we count upon you] we count on you
490.15 Goodwood’s unquenchable rancour] his unquenchable rancour
490.18 She met his eye with her sweet hospitable smile] She met his eyes with
her clear hospitable smile
490.20 he only opposed a stiff impatience] he opposed but a stiff impatience
490.23 at the Palazzo Roccanera] at Palazzo Roccanera
490.32 “I shall wait till they are all gone, then!”] “I shall wait till they are all
gone then.”
491.6 to wish that her sister-in-law would sound] to wish her sister-in-law
would sound
491.14 fanning herself, with the same familiar grace. She seemed to be waiting
for him] fanning herself; she had for him the same familiar grace. She seemed
to wait for him
491.16 the passion that he had never stifled] the passion he had never stifled
491.17 swim around him] swim round him
491.18 through the rustling tissue he saw Isabel hover] through the heaving
veil he felt her hover
491.20 perceived that her smile was fixed] perceived her smile was fixed
491.29 “You must come back some day,” Isabel rejoined, brightly.] “You
must come back some day,” she brightly returned.
492.6 without pretending to smile] without pretending to ease
492.9 so smooth] so smooth, so hard
492.22 I say that] I tell you
493.13 ¶“You have behaved so well; don’t spoil it,” she said, softly.] “You’ve
behaved so well; don’t spoil it,” she uttered softly.
493.19 that I shouldn’t] I shouldn’t
493.20 that you tell me——] that you tell me—!
493.29 Isabel went back] she went back
CHAPTER49
494.1 at the Palazzo Roccanera] at Palazzo Roccanera
494.9 her first utterance was an inquiry] her first utterance had been an
enquiry
494.14 Madame Merle $...$ smiled in the left corner] Madame Merle $...$
smiled at the left corner
495.1 she had been excessively afraid] she had been markedly afraid
495.2 for she had] since she now had
495.4 her admirable smile] her admirable ease
495.13 that she had so long thought] she had so long supposed
495.15 Madame Merle and her own husband] the wonderful lady and her
own husband
495.17 look at this lady with a different eye] view this friend with a different eye
495.21 brought it home to her] brought home to her
495.24 which at the very outset] which had at the very outset
495.25 a nameless vitality which Isabel now saw] a nameless vitality which
she could see
495.36 Do you think his lordship has left] Do you consider that Warburton
has left
496.31 ¶“Should you like to know how I judge him?”] “Should you like to
know how I judge him?”
497.6 ¶“I don’t despair,” she answered; “I feel encouraged.] “I don’t despair; I
feel encouraged.
497.16 She sat looking at Isabel a moment, to judge of the effect] She sat
looking at her friend, to judge the effect
497.16 then she went on—] then went on:
497.25 it’s a pity] and it’s a pity
497.32 Madame Merle had at last thought] her visitor had at last thought
498.8 the light of her visitor’s eyes] the light of this woman’s eyes
498.12 Madame Merle had married her!] Madame Merle had married her.
498.13 this lady had left] that lady had left
499.5 the wide grassy space lying before the high, cold front of St. John
Lateran; where you look] the wide grassy space before the high, cold front of
Saint John Lateran, whence you look
499.7 all that has vanished] all that has passed
499.8 she wandered about] she roamed
499.11 The carriage, passing out of the walls of Rome,] The carriage, leaving
the walls of Rome behind,
499.26 she had no personal acquaintance] she had had no personal
acquaintance
499.30 to be false] to be even deeply false
499.30 Madame Merle had been] Madame Merle had been—deeply, deeply,
deeply
500.1 that she should have desired] that she should so much have desired
500.5 she had desired that marriage, but she had] she had desired that
particular marriage but had
500.6 She therefore had had an idea of gain,] She had therefore had a
conception of gain
500.8 her discovery was very incomplete] her discovery was imperfect
500.11 her young friend was a victim of the good old man’s benevolence] her
young friend had been subject to the good old man’s charity
500.13 borrowing money from Isabel] borrowing money
500.14 the young girl’s fortune] the young woman’s fresh and ingenuous
fortune
500.16 Gilbert Osmond occupied this position] Gilbert occupied this
position
500.18 had married her for her money] had married her, like a vulgar
adventurer, for her money
500.22 very well] perfectly well
500.24 if he wanted her money, her money to-day would satisfy him] since he
had wanted her money, her money would now satisfy him
500.25 charity would help her] charity would but help her
500.27 to do Osmond a service, his recognition of the fact] to do Gilbert a
service his recognition to her of the boon
500.33 ¶“Poor Madame Merle!”] “Poor, poor Madame Merle!”
500.34 Her exclamation] Her compassion
501.10 he might have been so] he might have been
501.12 Osmond returned] he returned
501.19 ¶“On your side, don’t try to frighten me,” she said. “I wonder whether
you know some of my thoughts.” ¶“No more than I can help. I have quite
enough of my own.”] “On your side, don’t try to frighten me. I wonder if you
guess some of my thoughts.” ¶“I trouble about them no more than I can help.
I’ve quite enough of my own.”
501.22 looked at his companion for a long time, with a kind of cynical
directness] looked at his companion with a cynical directness
501.30 “Do you call it an interest?” Osmond inquired, languidly.] “Do you
call it an interest?” Osmond enquired with detachment.
501.35 “Damn my brilliancy!” Osmond murmured, thoughtfully.] “Damn my
brilliancy!” he thoughtfully murmured.
502.1 “If I don’t know you, I know nothing,” said Madame Merle, smiling.]
“If I don’t know you I know nothing,” smiled Madame Merle.
502.6 Osmond hesitated a moment.] Osmond just hung fire.
502.10 things that I should like to say] things I should like to say
502.12 Excuse me] Pardon me
502.12 a line sharply marked out] a line sharply drawn
502.21 Osmond still had] He still had
502.24 “The matter—the matter—”] “The matter—the matter—!”
502.32 I have a great hope of that.] I mean make me howl like a wolf. I’ve a
great hope, I’ve a great need, of that.
502.33 said Madame Merle] she said
503.1 my devilry that stupified her] my deviltry that stupified her
503.11 —You are very bad,” Madame Merle added, gravely.] You’re very
bad,” she added with gravity in her emphasis.
503.15 How do bad people end? You have made me bad.] How do bad people
end?—especially as to their common crimes. You have made me as bad as
yourself.
503.20 Her eye brightened, even flashed] The glow of her eye turned sombre
503.25 the same gesture that she had provoked] the same gesture she had
provoked
504.11 you wish to provoke me] you want to provoke me
504.18 I have not made you afraid of me, that I can see,” Osmond went on]
I’ve not made you afraid of me that I can see,” he went on
504.24 he continued] he pursued
504.28 upon her cup] on her cup
504.32 It already has a small crack] It already has a wee bit of a tiny crack
505.12 but giving a glance] but having a glance
505.12 at the contents] for the contents
505.19 “Ah,” said Madame Merle, softly, “if I had a child—”] “Ah,” she said
softly, “if I had a child—!”
505.20 Osmond hesitated a moment;] Osmond waited,
505.26 It is that,” said Madame Merle] It’s that,” Madame Merle pursued
505.28 relaxing into its usual social expression] relaxing to its habit of
smoothness
505.29 Osmond took up his hat] Her friend took up his hat
505.32 Madame Merle went and lifted] she went, the first thing, and lifted
505.35 “Have I been so vile all for nothing?” she murmured to herself.] “Have
I been so vile all for nothing?” she vaguely wailed.
CHAPTER50
506.6 She was not an antiquarian;] She had not the historic sense, though she
had in some directions the anecdotic, and as regards herself the apologetic,
506.10 at the Palazzo Roccanera] at Palazzo Roccanera
506.14 the Countess was not very active] the Countess forbade herself every
form of active research
506.21 her aunt] her parents’ guest
506.29 she felt weary, and preferred to sit] she felt weary and disposed
to sit
507.2 upon the ancient scandals of Florence. She remained below,] on the
ancient scandals of the Arnide. She so remained below
507.6 the latent colour which is the only living element] the latent colour that
is the only living element
507.19 and she could only give him] and that she could only give him
507.28 forty thousand dollars] fifty thousand dollars
507.35 I have got the money] I have the money
508.5 that they were the best thing] they were the best thing
508.9 he questioned her eye] he questioned her eyes
508.16 Isabel hesitated a moment.] Isabel debated.
509.4 “Ah, what a monster you make him out!” Rosier exclaimed, glancing at
the Countess] “Ah, what a monster you make him out!” And Rosier faced the
Countess
509.7 “I am glad you have kept your enamels!” Isabel exclaimed, leaving
him.] “I’m glad you’ve kept your enamels!” Isabel called as she left him.
509.10 said Isabel gently] she said gently
509.11 Pansy answered,] Pansy returned
509.13 Isabel, however, allowed herself this last liberty, and saw] Isabel
however, allowing herself this last liberty, saw
509.17 These facts, however] These facts, none the less
509.23 of the young girl] of the child
509.25 she said, affectionately] she affectionately said
509.34 that they were waiting] they were waiting
510.3 to have been waiting for her] to have been awaiting her
510.5 Excuse my taking the liberty] Pardon my taking the liberty
510.16 but Isabel could feel her trembling. The tremor of her little body
expressed everything that she was unable to say. ¶Nevertheless, Isabel went
on in a moment—] but her companion could feel her tremble. The quiver of
her little body expressed everything she was unable to say. Isabel nevertheless
pressed her.
510.22 as if she could not trust herself. And then she added,] as if she could
scarce trust herself; and then she added
510.24 a strange effect upon Isabel] a strange effect on Isabel
510.29 two dresses] two frocks
510.33 with a sort of diminutive grandeur] with an effect of diminutive
grandeur
510.36 ¶“Think of me, sometimes,” she said.] 1883 “Think of me, sometimes,”
she added.; “Think of me sometimes.”
511.5 she only felt that she did not know her husband yet. Her answer to
Pansy was a long tender kiss.] she felt how little she yet knew her husband. Her
answer to his daughter was a long, tender kiss.
511.17 make an affirmation] make a declaration
511.20 Osmond looked] He looked
511.24 I doubt whether I can make you understand] I doubt if I can make you
understand
511.28 the education of a young girl. A young girl should be fresh and
fair] the education of one’s daughter. One’s daughter should be fresh
and fair
511.29 so dusty and crumpled!] so dusty and crumpled.
512.1 a certain little feeling] a certain little sense of sequestration
512.7 He contemplated a while] He considered a while
512.14 I don’t want to make her fix her thoughts on the other one. This one is
very well, after all, and she may think of it as much as she chooses.] I don’t want
to make her fix her thoughts on any other. This one’s very well, as she should
take it, and she may think of it as much as she likes.
512.18 playing picturesque tricks upon the delicate organism] playing theo-
retic tricks on the delicate organism
512.22 He wished to do something] He had wanted to do something
512.24 and to show] and show
512.31 the impression her father wanted to make] the impression her father
desired to make
513.1 and Isabel found it hard] and his wife found it hard
513.2 the high, bright voice] the high, strained voice
513.4 but she had arrived] but had arrived
513.8 he seems to me a delightful young man] he seems to me
simpaticissimo
CHAPTER51
514.8 whether you have found out] whether you have found it out
514.8 Ralph is dying] Ralph is really dying
514.16 “I like him much better sick than when he used to be well,” said
Henrietta, who, it will be remembered, had taken a few years before a sceptical
view of Ralph’s disabilities.] omitted
514.17 for that Mr. Goodwood] inasmuch as Mr. Goodwood
514.18 quite as sick] quite as ailing
514.26 telegram which I have just quoted] telegram I have just quoted
515.5 but without looking round he recognised his wife] but he recognised his
wife without looking round
515.19 Osmond made no rejoinder] he made no rejoinder
516.13 “I shall be gratified then if you disobey me.” ¶“If I disobey you?” said
Isabel, in a low tone, which had the effect of gentleness.] “I should be gratified
in that case if you disobeyed me.” ¶“If I disobeyed you?” said Isabel in a low
tone which had the effect of mildness.
516.24 something $...$ that he could always appeal to] something $...$ he
could always appeal to
516.35 She recognised this] She recognised that
517.14 we, we, is all that I know] we, we, Mrs. Osmond, is all I know
517.21 Osmond paused a moment] he paused a moment
517.29 on Osmond’s part] on his part
518.6 the blight of her husband’s touch] the blight of Osmond’s touch
518.7 know that she was a victim] know she was a victim
518.13 “We don’t live decently together!” Isabel cried.] “We don’t live
decently together!” cried Isabel.
518.16 Osmond raised his eyebrows] He raised his eyebrows
518.20 I prefer my drawing,” he said, walking back to his table $...$ and stood
a moment examining his work] I prefer my drawing.” And he walked back to
his table $...$ and stood studying it
518.23 she could see that this movement at least was not studied] she could
see this movement at least was not designed
518.28 Osmond sat down] He sat down
518.31 Isabel lingered] She lingered
518.36 the art of eliciting one’s weakness] the art of eliciting any weakness
519.8 Everything here is so fearfully edifying.] Everything here’s of a dreari-
ness—!
519.14 “Ah, he was so nice! I am sorry for you,” she said.] “Ah, he was so
simpatico. I’m awfully sorry for you.”
519.24 “I am sure he has been odious!”] “I’m sure then he has been odious!”
520.5 leave the Palazzo Roccanera] leave Palazzo Roccanera
520.12 From the moment that she began] From the moment she thus began
520.19 It may seem to some readers that she took things very hard] It may
appear to some readers that she gave herself much trouble
520.34 a woman should abide with her husband] a woman should cleave to
the man with whom, uttering tremendous vows, she had stood at the altar
521.1 the Countess Gemini stood] the Countess Gemini hovered
521.4 She had come in noiselessly, unperceived; she had a strange smile on
her thin lips, and a still stranger glitter in her small dark eye. ¶“I knocked,” she
said] She had come in all unperceived; she had a strange smile on her thin lips
and her whole face had grown in an hour a shining intimation. She lived
assuredly, it might be said, at the window of her spirit, but now she was leaning
far out. “I knocked,” she began
521.10 to have something to say] to have a deal to say
521.11 something important] something really human
521.13 She fixed her brilliant eyes upon Isabel, who found at last a disagree-
able fascination in her gaze. “After all,” the Countess went on] She made play
with her glittering eyes, in which there was an unpleasant fascination. “After
all,” she soon resumed
521.25 a foreboding which made her heart beat] a foreboding that made her
heart beat faster
521.27 But the Countess seemed disposed to play] But she was nevertheless
disposed to play
521.32 “That’s because you have got such a pure mind.] “That’s because
you’ve such a beastly pure mind.
522.2 while the sharp animation of her bright, capricious face emitted a kind
of flash. She stood a moment looking at Isabel, and then she said—“My first
sister-in-law had no children!”] while her gathered perversity grew vivid and
dreadful. She stood a moment in a sort of glare of intention and, as seemed to
Isabel even then, of ugliness; after which she said: “My first sister-in-law had no
children.”
522.4 “Your first sister-in-law?” she murmured.] “Your first sister-in-law?”
522.6 “I suppose you know that Osmond has been married before? I have
never spoken to you of his wife; I didn’t suppose it was proper.] “I suppose you
know at least, if one may mention it, that Osmond has been married before!
I’ve never spoken to you of his wife; I thought it mightn’t be decent or
respectful.
522.8 the poor little woman lived but two years] the poor little woman lived
hardly three years
522.9 It was after her death that Pansy made her appearance.] It wasn’t till
after her death that Pansy arrived.
522.10 Isabel’s brow had gathered itself into a frown] Isabel’s brow con-
tracted to a frown
522.11 there seemed to be more] there seemed so much more
522.16 “I don’t understand; whose wife’s?” said Isabel.] “I don’t understand.
Whose wife’s?” Isabel asked.
522.22 “The wife of a horrid little Swiss, who died twelve years ago. He never
recognised Miss Pansy, and there was no reason he should. Osmond did, and
that was better.” ¶Isabel stayed the name which rose in a sudden question to
her lips; she sank down on her seat again, hanging her head. “Why have you
told me this?” she asked, in a voice which the Countess hardly recognised.]
“The wife of a horrid little Swiss who died—how long?—a dozen, more than
fifteen, years ago. He never recognised Miss Pansy, nor, knowing what he was
about, would have anything to say to her; and there was no reason why he
should. Osmond did, and that was better; though he had to fit on afterwards
the whole rigmarole of his own wife’s having died in childbirth, and of his
having, in grief and horror, banished the little girl from his sight for as long as
possible before taking her home from nurse. His wife had really died, you
know, of quite another matter and in quite another place: in the Piedmontese
mountains, where they had gone, one August, because her health appeared to
require the air, but where she was suddenly taken worse—fatally ill. The story
assed, sufficiently; it was covered by the appearances so long as nobody
heeded, as nobody cared to look into it. But of course I knew—without
researches,” the Countess lucidly proceeded; “as also, you’ll understand, with-
out a word said between us—I mean between Osmond and me. Don’t you see
him looking at me, in silence, that way, to settle it?—that is to settle me if I
should say anything. I said nothing, right or left—never a word to a creature, if
you can believe that of me: on my honour, my dear, I speak of the thing to you
now, after all this time, as I’ve never, never spoken. It was to be enough for me,
from the first, that the child was my niece—from the moment she was my
brother’s daughter. As for her veritable mother—!” But with this Pansy’s
wonderful aunt dropped—as, involuntarily, from the impression of her sis-
ter-in-law’s face, out of which more eyes might have seemed to look at her than
she had ever had to meet. ¶She had spoken no name, yet Isabel could but check,
on her own lips, an echo of the unspoken. She sank to her seat again, hanging
her head. “Why have you told me this?” she asked in a voice the Countess
hardly recognised.
522.26 “Because I was so tired of your not knowing! I was tired of not having
told you. It seemed to me so dull. It’s not a lie, you know; it’s exactly as I say.”
¶“I never knew,” said Isabel, looking up at her, simply.] “Because I’ve been so
bored with your not knowing. I’ve been bored, frankly, my dear, with not
having told you; as if, stupidly, all this time I couldn’t have managed! Ça me
dépasse, if you don’t mind my saying so, the things, all round you, that you’ve
appeared to succeed in not knowing. It’s a sort of assistance—aid to innocent
ignorance—that I’ve always been a bad hand at rendering; and in this con-
nexion, that of keeping quiet for my brother, my virtue has at any rate finally
found itself exhausted. It’s not a black lie, moreover, you know,” the Countess
inimitably added. “The facts are exactly what I tell you.” ¶“I had no idea,” said
Isabel presently; and looked up at her in a manner that doubtless matched the
apparent witlessness of this confession.
522.32 Has it never occurred to you that he has been her lover?” ¶“I don’t
know. Something has occurred to me. Perhaps it was that.” ¶“She has been
wonderfully clever about Pansy!” cried the Countess. ¶“That thing has never
occurred to me,” said Isabel. “And as it is—I don’t understand.”] Had it never
occurred to you that he was for six or seven years her lover?” ¶“I don’t know.
Things have occurred to me, and perhaps that was what they all meant.” ¶“She
has been wonderfully clever, she has been magnificent, about Pansy!” the
Countess, before all this view of it, cried. ¶“Oh, no idea, for me,” Isabel went
on, “ever definitely took that form.” She appeared to be making out to herself
what had been and what hadn’t. “And as it is—I don’t understand.”
523.2 She spoke in a low, thoughtful tone, and the poor Countess was equally
surprised and disappointed at the effect of her revelation. She had expected to
kindle a conflagration, and as yet she had barely extracted a spark. Isabel
seemed more awe-stricken than anything else. ¶“Don’t you perceive that the
child could never pass for her husband’s?” the Countess asked.] She spoke as
one troubled and puzzled, yet the poor Countess seemed to have seen her
revelation fall below its possibilities of effect. She had expected to kindle some
responsive blaze, but had barely extracted a spark. Isabel showed as scarce
more impressed than she might have been, as a young woman of approved
imagination, with some fine sinister passage of public history. “Don’t you
recognise how the child could never pass for her husband’s?—that is with M.
Merle himself,” her companion resumed.
523.3 M. Merle had gone] he had gone
523.12 On the other hand, circumstances made it convenient enough for
Osmond to acknowledge the little girl. His wife was dead—very true; but she
had only been dead a year, and what was more natural than that she should
have left behind a pledge of their affection? With the aid of a change of
residence—he had been living at Naples, and he left it for ever—the little
fable was easily set going. My poor sister-in-law, who was in her grave, couldn’t
help herself, and the real mother, to save her reputation, renounced all visible
property in the child.”] The conditions happened to make it workable, under
stress (I mean at so awkward a pinch), that Osmond should acknowledge the
little girl. His wife was dead—very true; but she had not been dead too long to
put a certain accommodation of dates out of the question—from the moment,
I mean, that suspicion wasn’t started; which was what they had to take care of.
What was more natural than that poor Mrs. Osmond, at a distance and for a
world not troubling about trifles, should have left behind her, poverina, the
pledge of her brief happiness that had cost her her life? With the aid of a change
of residence—Osmond had been living with her at Naples at the time of their
stay in the Alps, and he in due course left it for ever—the whole history was
successfully set going. My poor sister-in-law, in her grave, couldn’t help
herself, and the real mother, to save her skin, renounced all visible property
in the child.”
523.13 “Ah, poor creature!” cried Isabel, bursting into tears.] “Ah, poor, poor
woman!” cried Isabel, who herewith burst into tears.
523.14 suffered a reaction] suffered a high reaction
523.15 they gushed] they flowed
523.22 “It’s very kind of you to pity her!” she cried, with a discordant laugh.
“Yes, indeed, you have a pure mind!” ¶“He must have been false to his wife,”
said Isabel, suddenly controlling herself. ¶“That’s all that’s wanting—that you
should take up her cause!” the Countess went on.] “It’s very kind of you to pity
her!” she discordantly laughed. “Yes indeed, you have a way of your own—!”
¶“He must have been false to his wife—and so very soon!” said Isabel with a
sudden check. ¶“That’s all that’s wanting—that you should take up her cause!”
the Countess went on. “I quite agree with you, however, that it was much too
soon.”
523.30 “But to me—to me—” And Isabel hesitated, though there was a
question in her eyes. ¶ “To you he has been faithful? It depends upon what
you call faithful. When he married you, he was no longer the lover of another
woman. That state of things had passed away; the lady had repented; and she
had a worship of appearances so intense that even Osmond himself got tired of
it. You may therefore imagine what it was! But the whole past was between
them.”] “But to me, to me—?” And Isabel hesitated as if she had not heard; as if
her question—though it was sufficiently there in her eyes—were all for herself.
¶“To you he has been faithful? Well, it depends, my dear, on what you call
faithful. When he married you he was no longer the lover of another woman—
such a lover as he had been, cara mia, between their risks and their precautions,
while the thing lasted! That state of affairs had passed away; the lady had
repented, or at all events, for reasons of her own, drawn back: she had always
had, too, a worship of appearances so intense that even Osmond himself had
got bored with it. You may therefore imagine what it was—when he couldn’t
patch it on conveniently to any of those he goes in for! But the whole past was
between them.”
523.31 “Yes,” said Isabel] “Yes,” Isabel mechanically echoed
523.32 But for five years they were very intimate.”] But for six or seven years,
as I say, they had kept it up.” ¶She was silent a little.
523.35 she thought] she believed
524.6 your thinking that I lie] your believing that I lie
524.7 I have told little fibs;] I’ve told plenty of little idiotic fibs,
524.10 wares that some strolling gipsy might have unpacked] wares some
strolling gypsy might have unpacked
524.11 “Why did Osmond never marry her?” she asked, at last.] “Why did
Osmond never marry her?” she finally asked.
524.21 she had grown more ambitious.] she had grown more ambitious.
Besides, she has never had, about him,” the Countess went on, leaving Isabel
to wince for it so tragically afterwards—“she had never had, what you might
call any illusions of intelligence.
524.35 things that people have said] things people have said
525.5 I know you don’t care a fig] I know you don’t care a fig
525.17 with a face of deepening dreariness] with a face more and more wan
525.21 “Ah, that’s where she would stumble!”] “Ah, that’s where she’d dish
herself!”
525.22 She has failed so dreadfully herself that she is determined] She has
failed so dreadfully that she’s determined
525.24 the Countess threw off] her guest threw off
525.30 in spite of her lamentable parentage. I have liked Pansy, not because
she was hers—] in spite of her deplorable origin. I myself have liked Pansy; not,
naturally, because she was hers,
525.32 Isabel exclaimed, flushing quickly at the thought] Isabel exclaimed
while she flushed at the thought
525.35 has given Pansy a great lift] has given his daughter a great little lift
526.3 you know all about that.—] you know all about that.
526.6 give her a dowry] give her a dot
526.6 I shouldn’t believe it] I would refuse to believe it
526.8 Be a little wicked, feel a little wicked, for once in your life!] Be a little
easy and natural and nasty; feel a little wicked, for the comfort of it, once in
your life!
526.18 after she became proper] after she broke off—or he did
526.30 short of breath] scant of breath
527.2 She $...$ said softly, with her sharp, bright smile—] She $...$ said with
the penetration of her sharp bright smile:
527.9 “Ah, I must see Ralph!” Isabel murmured] “Ah, I must see Ralph!”
Isabel wailed
527.11 a tone of exquisite far-reaching sadness] a tone of far-reaching, infinite
sadness
CHAPTER52
528.4 of only one thing] only of one thing
528.13 she disliked the place, and it made her horribly sad] she disliked the
place, which affronted and almost frightened her
528.16 to pretend that Pansy was free] to pretend Pansy was free
528.18 to make Isabel reach out her hand to her] to make her reach out a hand
528.29 she found herself] found herself
528.31 flesh was a sort of reduplication] flesh was like suddenly, and rather
awfully, seeing a painted picture move
529.3 was a kind of vivid proof] had the character of ugly evidence, of
handwritings, of profaned relics, of grim things produced in court
529.14 she did not even pretend to smile] she pretended not even to smile
529.16 She looked at Isabel] She looked at her young friend
529.19 to mark a difference; she had been irritated] to mark a distinction. She
had been irritated
529.22 had ceased to look at her,] had ceased to notice
529.28 it was said simply and softly] it was said simply and mildly
529.33 good for a young girl] good for a small girl
529.34 about young girls] about small girls
530.1 told that other visitors were forbidden] told other visitors were
forbidden
530.7 a little black dress] a little black frock
530.17 to notify the Superior] to notify the Mother Superior
530.18 the poor Superior] the Mother Superior
530.24 a sudden rupture in her voice,] a sudden break in her voice, a lapse in
her continuity,
530.30 not the same one she had seen hitherto; it was a very different person]
not the same one she had seen hitherto, but was a very different person
530.31 and for the moment] and from the moment
530.36 able to go on] able to proceed
531.2 in not betraying herself] in her not betraying herself
531.2 She did not betray herself;] She resisted this,
531.6 Isabel saw all this as distinctly as if it had been a picture on the wall.]
Isabel saw it all as distinctly as if it had been reflected in a large clear glass.
531.10 almost a symptom] almost the promise
531.10 for a moment while she stood] for a moment during which she stood
531.12 Isabel enjoyed her knowledge] Isabel enjoyed that knowledge
531.13 what Isabel saw] what she saw
531.18 she had been a dull un-reverenced tool] she had been an applied
handled hung-up tool, as senseless and convenient as mere shaped wood and
iron
531.22 the hideous vision died away] the hideous vision dropped
531.26 a period which must have seemed] a period that must have seemed
531.28 Then Isabel turned her eyes and looked down at her.] Then Isabel
turned slow eyes, looking down at her.
531.34 Isabel said at last. “I am going to England to-night.”] our young
woman said at last. “I go to England to-night.”
531.35 Going to England] Go to England
532.3 “Do you go alone?” she asked.] “Do you go alone?”
532.12 She paused a moment, and then she said,] She paused a moment, then
added:
532.19 ¶“I had better go to Pansy,” she said.] “I had better go to Pansy.”
532.20 And while she looked] While she looked
532.23 Isabel recognised her as Madame Catherine] Isabel recognised
Madame Catherine
532.28 she directed her pleasant, cautious little eye towards Madame Merle]
she directed her pleased guarded vision to Madame Merle
533.13 eagerness to say something agreeable] eagerness to accommodate
533.17 upon Isabel’s ears] on Isabel’s ears
533.20 Pansy kneeled down before Isabel] Pansy kneeled down
533.33 “Ah; I’m sorry,” said Pansy, faintly.] “Ah, I’m sorry,” Pansy breathed
with faintness.
534.4 Pansy said nothing] the girl said nothing
534.7 deficient in the quality of intimacy] deficient in an air of intimacy
534.12 Her heart may almost have stood still,] Her heart may have stood
almost as still
534.12 if she had seen] had she seen
534.14 at each other; but as in this latter case] at each other. But in this latter
case
534.17 she said presently] she presently went on
534.19 Isabel answered; “for so long as you are here I am very far away from
you.”] Isabel explained; “since so long as you’re here I can’t be called near you.”
534.32 Isabel was silent a moment] Isabel said nothing for a minute
535.14 saw that the poor girl had been vanquished] saw the poor girl had been
vanquished
535.18 (mute and modest though it had been)] (mute and modest thought it
had been)
535.26 ¶“Good-bye, then,” she said; “I leave Rome to-night.”] “Good-bye
then. I leave Rome to-night.”
535.27 the girl’s face] the child’s face
535.33 saw that she had guessed] saw she had guessed
536.7 Isabel reflected a little.] Isabel considered.
536.12 ¶“Madame Merle has been here,” Pansy remarked] “Madame Merle
has been here,” she remarked
536.14 Isabel hesitated a moment; then she stopped.] Isabel hesitated, then
stopped.
536.26 Madame Catherine met Isabel] Madame Catherine met Mrs. Osmond
536.30 Isabel gave a start, and she was on the point of asking] Isabel stiffened;
she was on the point of asking
536.32 Pansy’s other visitor] Pansy’s other friend
536.34 Her companion laid her hand very gently on her arm, and fixing her a
moment with a wise, benevolent eye, said to her, speaking French, almost
familiarly—] Her companion grasped her arm very gently and fixing her a
moment with wise, benevolent eyes, said in French and almost familiarly:
537.1 “We think it’s enough,” said Madame Catherine, significantly.] “We
think it’s enough,” Madame Catherine distinctly observed.
537.5 closed the door behind Isabel,] closed the door
537.8 I found that I wished to wait] I found I wished to wait
537.20 her question] her utterance
537.23 Madame Merle hesitated a moment. ¶“It is difficult to explain.] She
just hung fire. “It’s rather hard to explain.
537.29 Madame Merle appeared to see herself successful, and she went on,]
Madame Merle appearing to see herself successful, she went on
537.32 it is him that you have to thank] it’s him you’ve to thank
538.1 to be living in a world] to live in a world
538.3 ¶“I don’t know why you say such things!] “I don’t know why you say
such things.
538.13 ¶“I shall go to America,” she announced,] “I shall go to America,” she
quietly remarked
CHAPTER53
539.7 felt that her telegram would produce] felt her telegram would produce
539.15 it was not reflection, nor conscious purpose,] it was neither reflexion
nor conscious purpose
539.17 The past and future alternated] The past and future came and went
539.18 which came and went] which rose and fell
539.25 That is, she had thought] She had thought
539.26 they were leaden-weighted] they had been weighted with lead
539.31 her richly-constituted refuge] her much-embracing refuge
540.3 a positive sanctuary] a sanctuary
540.11 that if her spirit was haunted with sudden pictures, it might have been
the spirit disembarrassed of the flesh] that she recalled to herself one of those
Etruscan figures couched upon the receptacle of their ashes
540.13 repentance seemed far away] repentance was far
540.14 Madame Merle had been so—so strange] Madame Merle had been
so—well, so unimaginable
540.15 Just here Isabel’s imagination paused] Just here her intelligence
dropped
540.17 where she was going] where she had announced she was going
540.23 It might be desirable to die; but this privilege was evidently to be
denied her.] It might be desirable to get quite away, really away, further away
than little grey-green England, but this privilege was evidently to be denied her.
540.26 almost exhilarating] almost enlivening
540.27 proof that she should] proof she should
540.28 that she was to live] she was to live
540.31 that she was too valuable] she was too valuable
540.32 she wondered whether it were vain and stupid] she wondered if it
were vain and stupid
540.33 When had it ever been] When had it even been
540.35 if one were delicate] if one were fine
541.2 She should not escape; she should last.] She should never escape; she
should last to the end.
541.8 She was so glad Henrietta was there] She rejoiced Henrietta had come
541.12 remembered that she had once liked] remembered she had once liked
541.22 felt that she had seen] felt she had seen
541.32 lovely that she has come] lovely she has come
541.33 “we had quite a discussion; he said you wouldn’t; I said you would.”]
“we had quite a discussion. He said you wouldn’t, I said you would.”
541.35 Isabel answered, smiling. She found she could smile now] Isabel
smiled in return. She felt she could smile now
541.36 Mr. Bantling’s excellent eye] Mr. Bantling’s brave eyes
542.1 It seemed to say that he wished her to remember that he was an old
friend] They seemed to say he wished to remember he was an old friend
542.3 she thought him so kind] she thought of him, extravagantly, as a
beautiful blameless knight
542.8 never thought so interesting] never found so interesting
542.13 No, I think it was rather rough,” said Isabel] No, I believe it was very
rough,” she said
542.17 been there] been to Gardencourt
542.18 I look sad? It’s very sad] I look awfully sad? It’s awfully sad
542.20 with a frankness] with a breadth
542.20 that she should] she should
542.23 and assured her] he assured her
542.25 ¶“You can ask Miss Stackpole, you know,” he said.] “You can ask Miss
Stackpole, you know.
542.28 Warburton was there] Warburton had been there
542.29 Touchett was just the same] Ralph was just the same
542.32 “He was immensely friendly all the same. $...$ It’s awfully sad.”] “He
was awfully jolly and funny all the same. $...$ It’s awfully wretched.”
542.36 I am very much obliged] I’m greatly obliged
543.5 very tired] awfully tired
543.6 I am very tired] I’m awfully tired
543.8 While Isabel vaguely noted that after all he and Henrietta seemed to
agree.] On which Isabel vaguely noted that he and Henrietta seemed after all to
agree.
543.12 now Isabel was at liberty] the latter was now at liberty
543.23 to get to your own] to get your own
543.26 she ushered Isabel] she ushered her friend
543.28 ¶Later,] And later,
543.29 she asked Isabel those questions] she asked those questions
543.31 Did your husband make a scene] Did your husband make you a scene
544.3 Henrietta for a moment contemplated her friend. ¶“It must have been
awful] Henrietta for a moment regarded her guest. “It must have been hellish
544.4 it had been awful] it had been hellish
544.9 I am not sure that I see myself, now] I’m not sure I myself see now
544.12 Isabel for a moment said nothing, then—¶“Perhaps I shall find
another,” she rejoined.] Isabel waited a moment. “Perhaps I shall find
another.”
544.17 Coming away was hard; but going back will be harder still.] Coming
away was a complication, but what will going back be?
544.18 make a scene] make you a scene
544.21 a scene that will last always] a scene of the rest of my life
544.22 the two women sat gazing at this prospect;] the two women sat and
considered this remainder,
544.26 the letter came at last!] the invitation came at last!
544.30 fixing her eyes] who fixed her eyes
544.35 Isabel perceived her meaning; it was so modestly $...$ veiled] Isabel
grasped her meaning; this sense was so modestly $...$ veiled
545.2 and with a gravity too pathetic to be real—] and with the right excess of
intensity,
545.7 I am going to reside in London] locate right here in London
545.10 I don’t know that I can explain] I don’t know as I can explain
545.14 Mr. Bantling is very good.” ¶Henrietta said nothing; she seemed lost in
reflection. ¶“He has a beautiful nature,” she remarked at last.] Mr. Bantling
isn’t a riddle.” ¶“No, he isn’t a bad pun—or even a high flight of American
humour. He has a beautiful nature,” Henrietta went on.
545.16 He’s as clear as glass—there’s no mystery about him.] He’s as clear as
the style of a good prospectus.
545.21 we are too intellectual; that, after all, is a glorious fault] we’re too
infatuated with mere brain-power; that, after all, isn’t a vulgar fault
545.28 Isabel was deeply diverted] Isabel was dully diverted
545.29 Henrietta, after all, was human] Henritetta, after all, had confessed
herself human
545.31 It was rather a disappointment to find that she had personal suscept-
ibilities] It was a disappointment to find she had personal susceptibilities
546.1 Mr. Bantling, after all, was original] Mr. Bantling himself at least was
original
546.7 she is supposed to be very talented] she’s supposed to be a master mind
546.8 she doesn’t understand a lady-correspondent!] she doesn’t understand
a woman of my modern type.
546.13 she will never understand—never!] she’ll never understand my mix-
ture—never!
546.17 that’s what he wants to marry me for—just to find out. It’s a fixed idea]
that’s what he wants to marry me for—just to find out the mystery and the
proportions of it. That’s a fixed idea
546.32 you think it’s very odd] you think it awfully odd
546.35 I think it’s so odd] I think it so awfully odd
CHAPTER54
547.4 so that Isabel, $...$ was coldly shown] so that $...$ she was coldly
shown
547.6 Mrs. Touchett appeared to be in no hurry] Mrs. Touchett appeared in
no hurry
547.8 she grew nervous and even frightened] she grew nervous and scared—
as scared as if the objects about her had begun to show for conscious things,
watching her trouble with grotesque grimaces
547.9 a stillness] with a stillness
547.14 everything that she had seen] everything she had seen
547.15 only yesterday that she stood there] only yesterday she had stood there
547.16 She reflected that things change but little, while people change so
much,] She envied the security of valuable “pieces” which change by no hair’s
breadth, only grow in value, while their owners lose inch by inch youth,
happiness, beauty;
547.17 the day that she came to see her] the day she had come to see her
547.21 and to-day she might have been a happier woman] and she might have
been a woman more blest
547.23 a beautiful and valuable Bonington] a charming and precious
Bonington
547.23 her eyes rested for a long time] her eyes rested a long time
547.31 whether her remarkable kinswoman resembled] if her remarkable
kinswoman resembled
548.2 as Isabel kissed her] on Isabel’s hot cheek
548.4 to her lunch] to luncheon
548.9 I remembered that you knew] I remembered you knew
548.10 I have been walking] I have been walking everywhere
548.11 whether Ralph slept much] if Ralph slept much
548.15 Mrs. Touchett hesitated a moment. “You can try him,” she said.] Mrs.
Touchett declined the office of saying. “You can try him,” was the limit of her
extravagance.
548.26 something told Isabel that it had not been slept in] something told
Isabel it had not been slept in
548.27 Her luggage was there, and it was not voluminous] Her luggage was
there and was not voluminous
548.29 ¶“Is there really no hope?” Isabel asked, standing before her aunt.] “Is
there really no hope?” our young woman asked as she stood before her.
549.6 Lily wrote me that you had dined] Lily wrote me you had dined
549.12 At this repast] For this respast
549.14 Isabel saw that her aunt was not so dry] Isabel saw her aunt not to be
so dry
549.19 It seemed to her she would find it a blessing to-day to be able to
indulge a regret. She wondered whether Mrs. Touchett were not trying,
whether she had not a desire for the recreation of grief.] Unmistakeably she
would have found it a blessing to-day to be able to feel a defeat, a mistake, even
a shame or two. She wondered if she were not even missing those enrichments
of consciousness and privately trying—reaching out for some aftertaste of life,
dregs of the banquet; the testimony of pain or the cold recreation of remorse.
549.20 if she began to regret,] if she should begin to know remorse at all
549.21 that it had come over her that she had missed something] how it had
come over her dimly that she had failed of something
549.23 Ralph as yet had not moved] Ralph had as yet not moved
549.29 to converse with Lord Warburton] to struggle again with Lord
Warburton
549.29 She presently said] She none the less presently said
549.32 Mrs. Touchett rejoined] Mrs. Touchett returned
549.34 Isabel saw that she meant something] Isabel saw she meant something
550.3 “Ah, to be married!” Isabel gently exclaimed.] “Ah, to be married!”
Isabel mildly exclaimed.
550.14 some curious emotion] some imputed soreness
550.27 how extremely sad she looked] how extremely wan she must have
looked
550.36 finished her lunch] finished her meal
551.2 she said to Isabel, when the servant had gone] she observed when the
servant had gone
551.7 Isabel left the table] as her niece left the table
551.8 while her aunt followed her with her eyes] she felt herself followed by
her eyes
551.11 Isabel shook her head slowly, smiling.] Isabel shook her head slowly,
but not heavily.
551.13 “Your believing me is an immense temptation,” Isabel replied] “Your
believing me’s an immense temptation,” she declared
551.18 It is my husband that doesn’t get on] It’s my husband who
doesn’t get on
551.19 I could have told him that.] I could have told him he wouldn’t.
551.32 after a while he went away;] after a while went away—
551.36 word that he was now dead,] word he was now dead
552.3 towards evening] toward evening
552.4 How he knew it was not apparent;] How he knew was not apparent,
552.8 She told the nurse that she might go—that she herself would sit] She
told the nurse she might go—she herself would sit
552.10 lay very helpless] lay helpless
552.15 but this was worse; there was only one change] and this was worse;
there was but one change
552.21 he lay for three days] he lay three days
552.22 at moments he seemed to wish] at moments seemed to wish
552.31 a letter from Florence from the Countess Gemini] a letter from
Florence and from the Countess Gemini
553.4 when I have all eternity to rest?” he asked.] when I have all eternity to
rest?
553.4 when it is the very last.] when it’s the very last of all
553.31 Now he might know] Now he must know
554.20 “But for that—but for that—” $...$ “I believe I ruined you,” he added
softly.] “But for that—but for that—!” $...$ “I believe I ruined you,” he wailed.
554.26 He married me for my money] He married me for the money
555.14 “Are you going back to him?” Ralph stammered.] “Are you going back
to him?” Ralph gasped.
556.6 I don’t believe——” And he stopped again] I don’t believe—” But he
stopped again
556.9 I don’t believe that such a generous mistake as yours—can hurt you] I
don’t believe that such a generous mistake as yours can hurt you
556.14 if you have been hated, you have also been loved.” ¶“Ah, my
brother!” she cried,] if you’ve been hated you’ve also been loved. Ah but,
Isabel—adored!” he just audibly and lingeringly breathed. ¶“Oh my brother!”
she cried
CHAPTER55
557.6 for it was her belief] it being her belief
557.13 that Ralph was standing there—a dim, hovering figure in the dimness
of the room] that he was standing there—a vague, hovering figure in the
vagueness of the room
557.15 She went out of her room,] She quitted the place
557.17 Outside of Ralph’s door] Outside Ralph’s door
557.23 The nurse was at the foot,] The two nurses were at the foot
558.1 rising, as it were, to take it] rising, as might be, to take it
558.3 “Poor Aunt Lydia,” Isabel murmured.] “Dear Aunt Lydia,” Isabel
murmured.
558.7 in the height of the London “season,”] at the height of the London
“season,”
558.13 but it was not a disagreeable one] but neither a harsh nor a heavy one
558.23 a group of gentlemen unknown to Isabel] a group of gentlemen all
unknown to her
558.32 She found that she had taken for granted] She found she had taken for
granted
558.33 she remembered that it was not a country that pleased him] she
remembered how little it was a country that pleased him
559.9 what she left her husband for] what she had left her husband to do
559.16 There was a deadly sadness in the thought] There was a penetrating
chill in the image
559.27 a certain satisfaction] a certain utility
559.33 for the worst of dying] since the worst of dying
560.16 you were handsomely treated] you had been handsomely treated
560.35 she was trying to fix it a little] she was trying to fix it for an hour
561.5 to call upon Mrs. Touchett] to call on Mrs. Touchett
561.6 that he had come to see] he had come to see
561.7 the validity of this theory] the validity of this thesis
561.19 if she had had time she would have drawn back,] if she had had a
chance, would have drawn back
561.20 she saw that she had been seen] she saw she had been seen
561.27 whom you might have married] you might have married
561.31 he greeted her without a smile] greeted her without a smile
562.2 Mrs. Touchett’s companion explained, rather irrelevantly] Mrs.
Touchett’s companion rather irrelevantly explained
562.26 his lordship blushed a little] his lordship coloured a little
562.29 for three days] for five days
562.32 Isabel wondered whether] Isabel wondered if
563.10 without meeting her eye] without meeting her eyes
563.23 in this spot] on this spot
563.28 read that letter] read the letter
563.34 people of sensibility] persons of sensibility
564.12 a few feet off] a few yards off
564.16 Goodwood saw that he was seen] Goodwood saw he was seen
564.20 a touch that she had obeyed] a touch, which she had obeyed
564.22 only to-day it was worse] only at present it was worse
564.23 she only felt him close to her.] she only felt him close to her—beside
her on the bench and pressingly turned to her.
564.25 but a moment] but an instant
565.2 as when they parted in Rome] as when they had parted in Rome
565.6 something awful in his persistency. Isabel gazed straight] something
really formidable in his resolution. She gazed straight
565.8 to darken around them] to darken round them
565.10 That was no use] That was of no use
565.14 I came here to-day for a purpose; it’s very different. It was no use for
me to speak to you then] I came here to-day for a purpose. It’s very different. It
was vain for me to speak to you then
565.27 He was a good fellow—he was a noble fellow—he told me how the case
stands. He explained everything; he guessed what I thought of you.] He was a
good man, a fine man, one of the best; he told me how the case stands for you.
He explained everything; he guessed my sentiments.
566.3 but at present he had an idea. Isabel scented his idea in all her being.
“But it doesn’t matter!” he exclaimed, pressing her close,] but at present he had
an idea, which she scented in all her being. “But it doesn’t matter!” he
exclaimed, pressing her still harder,
566.8 your husband’s a devil!] your husband’s the deadliest of fiends.
566.17 It will cost you your life! When I know that, how can I keep myself
from wishing to save you?] It will have cost you your life? Say 
it will”—and he flared almost into anger: “give me
one word of truth! When I know such a horror as that, how can I keep myself
from wishing to save you?
566.21 making his point again] making his queer grim point again
566.26 Now it is that I want you to think of me.” ¶“To think of you?” Isabel
said,] You can’t turn anywhere; you know that perfectly. Now it is therefore
that I want you to think of me.” ¶“To think of ‘you’?” Isabel said,
566.30 You don’t know where to turn; turn to me!] You don’t know where to
turn. Turn straight to me.
566.32 then he paused a moment, with his shining eyes] then he paused with
his shining eyes
566.34 “To get away from you!”] “To get away from you!”
566.36 It wrapped her about; it lifted her off her feet.] Copy text It wrapped
her about it lifted her off her feet.; NYE She had believed it, but this was
different; this was the hot wind of the desert, at the approach of which the
others dropped dead, like mere sweet airs of the garden. It wrapped her about;
it lifted her off her feet, while the very taste of it, as of something potent, acrid
and strange, forced open her set teeth.
567.3 to prove that he was sane] to prove he was sane
567.5 I wish to prevent that, and I think I may, if you will only listen to me. It’s
too monstrous to think of sinking back into that misery.] I want to prevent
that, and I think I may, if you’ll only for once listen to me. It’s too monstrous of
you to think of sinking back into that misery, of going to open your mouth to
that poisoned air.
567.13 the bottomless idiocy of the world!] the bottomless idiocy of the world.
567.23 If you only trust me] If you’ll only trust me
567.24 the world is very large] the world’s very big
567.34 everything that he said; but she believed] everything he said; but she
believed just then
567.35 the next best thing to dying] the next best thing to her dying
567.36 she felt herself sinking and sinking] she felt herself sink and sink
568.5 his voice seemed to come through a confusion of sound] his voice
seemed to come, harsh and terrible, through a confusion of vaguer sounds
568.9 the noise of waters, and all the rest of it, were in her own head. In an
instant she became aware of this. “Do me the greatest kindness of all,” she
said.] the noise of waters, all the rest of it, were in her own swimming head. In
an instant she became aware of this. “Do me the greatest kindness of all,” she
panted.
568.16 His kiss was like a flash of lightning; when it was dark again she was
free. She never looked about her; she only darted away from the spot.] His kiss
was like white lightning, a flash that spread, and spread again, and stayed; and
it was extraordinarily as if, while she took it, she felt each thing in his hard
manhood that had least pleased her, each aggressive fact of his face, his figure,
his presence, justified of its intense identity and made one with this act of
possession. So had she heard of those wrecked and under water following a
train of images before they sink. But when darkness returned she was free. She
never looked about her; she only darted from the spot.
568.27 her bonnet and jacket] her hat and jacket
568.29 I was in hope I should find Mrs. Osmond] I was in hopes I should find
Mrs. Osmond
569.5 “Oh, she started—” he stammered.] “Oh, she started—?” he
stammered.
569.6 he turned away.] he stiffly averted himself. But he couldn’t otherwise
move.
569.10 On which he looked up at her.] ¶On which he looked up at her—but
only to guess, from her face, with a revulsion, that she simply meant he was
young. She stood shining at him with that cheap comfort, and it added, on the
spot, thirty years to his life. She walked him away with her, however, as if she
had given him now the key to patience.
